--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 0) ---
SECONDARY ONE
SINGAPORE
A Journey Through Time, 
1299–1970s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 1) ---
2021 Curriculum Planning & Development Division
Ministry of Education, Singapore
51 Grange Road
Singapore 249564
Published by
Star Publishing Pte Ltd
115A Commonwealth Drive, #05-12  
Singapore 149596  
Tel: (65) 6479 6800
Website: www.starpub.com.sg  
Email: contactus@starpub.com.sg
First published 2021
Reprinted 2022
Reprinted 2024
Reprinted 2025
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 1) ---
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of 
the copyright owner. Any request for permission should be 
addressed to the publisher.
ISBN 978-981-4895-24-8
Printed by KHL Printing Co Pte Ltd, Singapore
Front and back covers Cavenagh Bridge, 2018 © Phuong D. Nguyen/  
Shutterstock.com. Cavenagh Bridge, c. 1900 © Gretchen Liu Collection,  
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 2) ---
Preface
You are about to embark on an exciting journey through the past! Far from being just fun facts and dates, history 
is alive and all around us. Look around you and the Singapore you are living in today – you can find traces of the 
past in buildings, places, names and even objects. The study of history allows us to make sense of the past and draw 
connections to the present.
Have you ever wondered how Singapore came to be?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 2) ---
Have you ever wondered how Singapore came to be? 
This book takes you on a journey to uncover Singapore’s development over the centuries. You will read stories and 
examine historical sources that provide clues to answering questions about Singapore’s past. 
Start with From Temasek to Singapore (1299–Early 1800s) and trace Singapore’s connections to India, China, the 
Southeast Asian region and beyond from as early as 1299. Find out how Singapore was part of the key trading
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 2) ---
networks even before the arrival of the British.
Your journey continues with Singapore’s Development as a Port City Under the British (1819–1942). Here, you will 
examine how British rule and external developments shaped Singapore in various ways. During this period, many 
different groups of people from the region and beyond also came to live and work in Singapore. Learn about their 
experiences, the challenges they faced and their contributions up to the fall of Singapore in 1942.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 2) ---
When you move on to Secondary 2, you will proceed to study Singapore’s Struggle for Independence (1942–1965). 
You will explore how key developments from the 1940s to the 1960s shifted Singapore from a British colony to an 
independent country. As you learn more about Singapore’s road to independence, you will discover how this was 
influenced by post-war global and regional forces, and individuals during this period.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 2) ---
The journey comes to a rest with Surviving as an Independent Nation-State (1965–Late 1970s). Here, you will find 
out how a sense of belonging, reality and hope was fostered as Singapore navigated the challenges of being a newly 
independent nation-state during this time.
In this journey, various features in this coursebook will guide you in making sense of Singapore’s history. Through
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 2) ---
your study, you will develop greater awareness and curiosity about the past and its relationship to the present. The 
knowledge and skills you acquire will enable you to be open to multiple perspectives and empathise with people 
from diverse backgrounds. These will stand you in good stead, not just academically, but also in your everyday life. 
Singapore’s history does not just end here. Your experiences and stories will one day become part of it as time
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 2) ---
passes. Knowing history puts you in a better position to make decisions that will shape the future.
Finally, have an enriching and exciting journey ahead as you learn about Singapore’s rich history!
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 3) ---
How to Use This Book 
In each chapter, interwoven in the content are historical concepts, skills and activities that can guide you in 
answering the inquiry question.
Features to Guide  Features to Guide  
and Consolidate Learningand Consolidate Learning
Chapter Inquiry
The key question provides 
a focal point for you to 
investigate the chapter topic.
Timeline  
The timeline helps you understand key events and developments 
that took place in Singapore and beyond. You will see the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 3) ---
sequence of events that will be mentioned in the chapter.
Let’s Review  
This feature helps you 
consolidate your learning 
by linking it to the 
chapter inquiry.
Chapter at a Glance 
This feature outlines the 
content that you will learn  
from the chapter.
Imagine you are a migrant who moved from China, India or the surrounding regions to Singapore in the  
19th century. You have worked here for three months. You might be an entrepreneur, a labourer or a
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 3) ---
craftsman. What would a typical day in your life look like? What might be your thoughts, feelings and 
actions? You can use the picture below as a frame to share your “life story”.
Share your “life story” with a classmate.
see
smell
hear
saythink
domovewish/hope feelLET’S REVIEW
166 SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
CHAPTER  
1How Connected Was Early Singapore  
to the Region and the World?
Chapter at a Glance
You will learn:
• Why the Japanese invaded
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 3) ---
You will learn:
• Why the Japanese invaded 
Singapore during World War II
• Why Singapore fell to the 
Japanese during World War II
44 FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
 
In SingaporeFollowing the Dutch defeat 
of Johor-Riau and its Bugis 
allies in war, Johor-Riau 
signs treaties which result  
in it becoming a vassal of 
the Netherlands.
Singapore experiences little 
trade or economic activity.The British 
establish a 
trading post 
in Penang.The British East 
India Company
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 3) ---
in Penang.The British East 
India Company 
(EIC) is founded.The Dutch East 
India Company 
(VOC) is founded.War breaks 
out between 
France and other 
European powers.Beyond SingaporeBritain takes over Java 
from the Dutch and Sir 
Stamford Raffles becomes 
its Lieutenant-Governor.
 Sir Stamford Raffles View of the VOC's 
headquarters in Amsterdam, 
c. 1760s View of East India House, the 
headquarters of the EIC, on 
Leadenhall Street, London, 1817
1602 1789 1786 1811 1600Timeline
1784
iv
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
Features to Develop Skills  Features to Develop Skills  
and Conceptual Understandingand Conceptual Understanding
Case Investigation
This feature explores historical 
issues using a range of sources, 
allowing you to engage in a 
short inquiry task related to  
the chapter inquiry.
Sources
Sources are used to illustrate people’s experiences or 
perspectives. The accompanying questions guide you in 
examining these sources more closely.  
Learn a Skill
This feature introduces the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
Learn a Skill
This feature introduces the 
skills of historical analysis. Using 
examples from the chapter,  
it highlights a particular skill 
and gives you opportunities  
to apply your learning. 
Be a Young Historian
This feature introduces you to key 
historical concepts and explains how 
they are relevant to the study of history.  
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
66 FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Today, Raffles’ name can be seen all over Singapore: Raffles Place MRT station and Raffles Boulevard, just 
to give a few examples. This is because Raffles is often recognised as the founder of Singapore. However, 
not everyone takes this view.
Given what you have learnt about the contributions of Raffles, Farquhar and Crawfurd to the development
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
of Singapore, who do you think founded Singapore? Before answering this question, think about what it 
means to be a founder. What does it mean to found a place?
Some maintain that Raffles was the founder as he signed the 1819 Treaty that allowed the British to 
set up a trading post in the southern part of Singapore. Others argue that Farquhar was the founder of 
Singapore as he did the work of building Singapore from scratch. Some may even consider Crawfurd the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
founder as he signed the 1824 Treaty of Friendship and Alliance that gave the British control over the  
whole island.
Read the sources that follow and conduct your own investigation into who founded Singapore.Who founded Singapore?CASE INVESTIGATION
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)In Chapter 2, you learnt that historians often examine the causes of key historical events. This is not always
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
a straightforward matter. Related events do not necessarily take place one after another, and one event 
does not always lead to another. To really understand how a historical event came about, historians have to 
examine the possible causes from different angles. One useful way is to look at them in terms of:
• the broader context or setting (e.g., physical, political, economic, social, cultural, military) in which  
the event took place;
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
the event took place;
• the immediate or local circumstances of the event (e.g., whether people were unhappy or prepared to 
act, the weather on the day of the event); and
• the roles of key historical actors (individuals who made major decisions that contributed to the historical 
event).
Besides looking at causes separately, it is also useful to look at how different causes might have interacted
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
with one another. Keep this in mind as you read about the fall of Singapore during World War II in  
this chapter.
Historical Actors
(people involved in 
 making key decisions  
that contributed to  
the historical event)
Circumstances
(local or immediate  
conditions where  
the historical event  
happened)Context
(the setting in which 
the historical event 
happened)
Historical 
EventBE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CAUSATION
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
174
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
174
When examining images, such as photographs or illustrations, study them in detail and search for clues 
within the images to help you understand what they are trying to show. Use the three-step process of  
See-Think-Wonder to guide you. Look at the steps below.
Here is an example of how the See-Think-Wonder process can be used to analyse an image.
Example
 Illustration of labourers 
working on a steamship, 
published in Illustrated 
London News, a weekly
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
published in Illustrated 
London News, a weekly 
British newspaper,  
18 January 1873See:  
What do you see?Think:  
What do you  
think is going on?Wonder:  
What does it  
make you wonder?1 2 3Step Step StepLEARN A SKILL: ANALYSING IMAGES
What do you see?What do you think  
is going on?What does it make  
you wonder?
What details do you see in the image? What do you think might be going on 
in the image? (You may tap on your
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
in the image? (You may tap on your 
contextual knowledge about this topic.)What additional questions/thoughts do 
you have regarding this image?
I see …
• many labourers; 
• labourers working at night; 
• labourers working on a steamship; 
• a seated man with folded arms; 
• another seated man resting his chin 
on his hand; and
• the shadows of some of the 
labourers on the side of the ship.I think …
• the labourers worked in cramped 
conditions to deliver coal supplies to 
the steamship;
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
the steamship;
• the labourers were closely 
supervised to ensure that they 
completed the loading of coal 
supplies on time; and
• life for the labourers was difficult as 
they had to do back-breaking work.I wonder …
• why the labourers were working at 
night;
• how the labourers were paid for 
their labour; and
• if this image is representative of the 
lives of the labourers working in 
Singapore at the time.1 2 3
152 SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
When you encounter the enemy after landing, regard yourself as an avenger who has at last come face to face with his 
father’s murderer. Here before you is the man whose death will lighten your heart of its burden of brooding anger. If you 
fail to destroy him utterly, you can never rest at peace. And the first blow is the vital blow.
– An extract adapted from Read This Alone and the War Can Be Won,  
a pamphlet given to Japanese soldiers on their way to attack Malaya
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 4) ---
1. What emotions do you think this pamphlet was trying to raise among the Japanese soldiers?
2. What does this tell you about the preparations that the Japanese made for the attack on Malaya and Singapore?SOURCE 5
1. What emotions do you think this pamphlet was trying to stir up among the Japanese soldiers?
2. What does this tell you about the preparations that the Japanese made for the attack on Malaya and Singapore?
v
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 5) ---
Illustrated Stories 
This feature combines 
illustrations and narration 
to help enhance your 
understanding of people, 
events and developments 
in history. 
Did You Know?
This feature provides you with fun facts 
relevant to the chapter content.
Features to Enhance Understanding  Features to Enhance Understanding  
or Encourage Explorationor Encourage Exploration
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
From the 17th to mid-19th centuries,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 5) ---
From the 17th to mid-19th centuries, 
Japan had kept to itself.To do this, the Japanese set out to build their own 
empire in Asia, which would give them the land and 
resources they needed.
This would eventually bring Japan into 
conflict with Britain and the United States.Foreigners were banned, except at a few trading ports.
The Japanese realised that they had 
fallen far behind the Western countries.Everything changed in 1853, when warships from the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 5) ---
United States arrived. The United States wanted Japan 
to open more ports and increase trade between them.
To catch up, Japan had to change.
In less than 50 years, Japan became a modern, industrialised country.However, being a mountainous and heavily forested 
country, Japan lacked natural resources of its own.At the same time, Japan had ambitions 
of becoming a great power.
Britain Japan The United States
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 5) ---
Britain Japan The United States
176 177 DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?The RISE of MODERN JAPAN
In addition to the naval base, the British built underground bunkers in secret places all over the island. These bunkers were used 
for defence purposes, such as stores and air-raid shelters. One of the most extensive networks of bunkers lies at Fort Canning,  
where the headquarters of the British forces was located.DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 5) ---
The entrance (left) and interior (right) of Battlebox, an underground British military command centre, which is open to the public as part of the Battlebox tour
vi
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 6) ---
Glossary  
The glossary explains keywords and vocabulary used. 
Learn on the Go
Scan the QR code or use the 
link to access a relevant lesson 
on the Singapore Student 
Learning Space (SLS) to extend 
your learning. 
Who Was  
This feature gives you 
background information on 
key historical personalities 
introduced in the chapter.
?
“Think” Bubbles  
This feature encourages you to 
think more deeply about what 
you have just read on the page.  
How would Raffles’ 
actions have been
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 6) ---
How would Raffles’ 
actions have been 
viewed by the  
different parties?
Think!
LEARN ON THE GO
Explore the 
diversity of people’s 
experiences in 
colonial Singapore @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc402 .
Who was  
HENRY RIDLEY?
Henry Nicholas Ridley (1855–1956) 
became the first Director of the 
Singapore Botanic Gardens in 1888. 
He is most well-known for inventing 
a technique for tapping rubber trees 
without damaging them, which 
extended the trees’ productivity and 
lifespan. Known as “Mad Ridley” or
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 6) ---
lifespan. Known as “Mad Ridley” or 
“Rubber Ridley” , he repeatedly tried 
to interest European and Chinese 
businessmen to cultivate rubber trees 
as an agricultural crop. His promotion 
of rubber coincided with the invention 
of the pneumatic tyre for motor cars. 
In 1955, just before he passed away, the 
Institution of the Rubber Industry gave 
him its highest award, the Colwyn Medal.
?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 6) ---
him its highest award, the Colwyn Medal.
?
1 To monopolise or have monopoly over something means that a company, person or state has complete control over it  
so that it is impossible for others to become involved in it.
vii
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 7) ---
View of Singapore from Government Hill (present-day Fort Canning Hill) by John Turnbull Thomson, 1846
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 9) ---
Detail from Town and Harbour of Singapore, drawn by William Farquhar and presented to the East India Company in 1825
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 10) ---
10 How Connected Was Early Singapore  
to the Region and the World?CHAPTER 1
42 How Did Singapore Become  
a British Trading Post?CHAPTER 2
74 How Did British Rule and External 
Developments Affect Singapore’s Growth 
as a Port City from 1819 to 1942?CHAPTER 3
132 What Role Did the People in Singapore 
Play in Its Development as a Port City 
from 1819 to 1942?CHAPTER 4
170 Did Singapore Have to Fall to  
the Japanese in World War II?CHAPTER 58UNIT 1: OVERVIEW
From Temasek to Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 10) ---
From Temasek to Singapore  
(1299–Early 1800s)INTRODUCTION
What Is History All About? 2
72UNIT 2: OVERVIEW
Singapore’s Development as a Port City 
Under the British (1819–1942)
CONTENTS
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 11) ---
What is history to you? Is history simply a collection of stories from the past? A long list of facts and dates to 
remember? What do you know about the history of Singapore?
Before we go further, let us start with this simple activity.
Do you remember what happened during your first day of school? Write it down on a piece of paper. 
You could think about how you travelled to school, who you met upon entering school, or the activities
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 11) ---
that you participated in during orientation. When you are ready, share it with your class.
Now that you have shared what your first day of school was like, take a closer look at what you have 
written and compare it with a friend’s. What do you notice? It is likely that there are details that your 
friend included that you left out. 
Why do you think there might be a difference? What made you choose to include some details and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 11) ---
exclude others, and why is it not possible to include every detail? These are some of the questions that 
you may have when thinking about history and how it is written.
What Is History All About?
ACTIVITY
INTRODUCTION
On the first day of school ...
2
INTRODUCTION
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 12) ---
History is the study of the past. This may include individuals, societies, 
past events and developments, or even places. However, history is not the 
past. History does not and cannot fully show how it was like in the past.
This may not make sense at first, but think back to the earlier activity where 
you wrote about your first day of school. You chose to include certain 
details while leaving out others because it would have been impossible for
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 12) ---
you to feature everything that happened that day. Would another person 
be able to completely know what it was like for you on the first day of 
school?
In the same way that you selected events or experiences that you felt were 
most important to you, historians have to make decisions regarding what 
to focus on and how to present it, based on what they feel would best 
represent the past. As historians are also people like you, their perspectives
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 12) ---
are also shaped by their personal experiences. From this, you can see that 
history consists of different accounts carefully constructed by historians.What Is History?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 13) ---
Types of SourcesHow Is History Constructed?
When you recall past events in your everyday life, you do so based on your memories. However, instead of relying 
on their own memories, historians have to rely on clues to construct history. These clues are called sources. When 
you ask good questions about sources, you are able to extract useful evidence from the sources about what the 
past might have been like.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 13) ---
past might have been like. 
The chart below shows the different types of sources historians may use and questions historians may ask to find 
out more about the past. What other questions might you ask?
 Rickshaw from the late 19th century on display at the National Museum of Singapore. 
Rickshaws were a form of transportation in colonial Singapore. Chettiar marriage necklace, 19th century
Questions you can ask about sources to find out more about the past: 
• Who produced the source?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 13) ---
• Who produced the source?
• When was the source produced?
• Where was the source produced  
or found?
• Why was the source made?• What was the source used for?
• What does the source tell you about 
the past?
• What is excluded from the source? 
Artefacts  
Objects used and left behind by people in the past
4
INTRODUCTION
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 14) ---
Map showing the region around Singapore and Johor by  
Manuel Godinho de Erédia, a Malay-Portuguese writer, 1613  Drawing of Chinatown and Thian Hock Keng Temple by Marie Fauconnier,  
a French artist, 1910
 Landing permit of a Chinese migrant, 1934 Sejarah Melayu ( Sulalat al-Salatin),  
edited by Munshi Abdullah, Singapore, 1840
It is important for historians to use a variety of sources from various viewpoints to inform their construction of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 14) ---
history. Why do you think this is so?   Picture of an oral history interview in 
progress. Oral accounts of the past 
can be collected by interviewing 
people about their life experiences. 
Pictorial Records  
Maps, photographs, paintings, posters and cartoons
Written Accounts and Records  
Personal and government documents, newspapers, letters and books
Oral Accounts  
Spoken words, stories and eyewitness accounts
5
WHAT IS HISTORY ALL ABOUT?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 15) ---
Historians need to ensure that the evidence they have is strong enough to make sound conclusions about  
the past. 
However, it is important to remember that historians make conclusions about the past based on the sources that 
are available to them. It is impossible for historians to completely recover or recreate everything from the past. 
This means that claims they make about the past may change when new evidence comes to light.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 15) ---
The diagram below outlines the steps historians may take to understand more about the past. You will be 
following these steps in your study of history.
Asking questions 
about the past1Gathering 
sources2
Exercising reasoning to write a 
logical conclusion about the past4Examining the sources to extract 
information in order to form a 
response to the questions asked3
Stages of Historical Inquiry
6
INTRODUCTION
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 16) ---
Now that you know what history is and how it is constructed, why should you study it?
You study history in order to:
• understand what people went through in the past;
• make connections between the past and the present to anticipate the future; and
• acquire critical thinking skills that are useful in your daily life.
Your journey through Lower Secondary History begins in late 13th-century Singapore. Read on to find out more 
about Singapore’s history!Why Study History?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 16) ---
about Singapore’s history!Why Study History?
 View of South Bridge Road by Peter Bernhard Wilhelm Heine, 1860
7
WHAT IS HISTORY ALL ABOUT?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 17) ---
1This map shows major trade routes connecting Asia to Europe in the past. 
Look at where Singapore is located. 
• What do you notice about Singapore’s location?
• Why do you think Singapore’s location might have been important in bringing about its 
success as a trading port? From Temasek to Singapore (1299–Early 1800s)UNIT
 OVERVIEW
EUROPE
AFRICA
INDIAN OCEANMIDDLE EAST
Legend
Maritime route
Overland routeN
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 18) ---
In this unit, we will explore how Singapore’s location within trading networks affected its rise and decline as a 
trading port. We start the story in 1299, tracing Singapore’s rise and decline through the centuries, until the arrival 
of the British in 1819. Embark on a journey to discover how Singapore’s geographical location and reactions to 
events occurring in the wider region contributed to its success or failure as a trading port.
INDIACHINAASIA
PACIFIC OCEAN
SINGAPOREMALAY ARCHIPELAGO
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 20) ---
1 A trading centre is where the exchange and sale of goods takes place. It is typically located along a major trade route.
11
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?Look at the scenes below of Singapore today. What do they tell you  
about Singapore? 
CHAPTER  
1
How Connected Was Early Singapore 
to the Region and the World?
You will learn:
• What Singapore was like 
before 1819
• What connections early 
Singapore had with the 
region and the world
• How regional and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 20) ---
region and the world
• How regional and 
international developments 
shaped early SingaporeSingapore has been an independent country since 1965. It is an important 
trading centre1 for the region and the world. Singapore is also a diverse 
society. People from different races, who speak different languages and 
practise different religions, live and work in this country.
Have you ever wondered:
• What was Singapore like in the past?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 20) ---
• What was Singapore like in the past?
• How similar or different was Singapore in the past compared to today?
• How did Singapore become what it is today?
In 1856, the British official Dr John Crawfurd wrote that there was no record 
of Singapore having been occupied before the British arrived in 1819. It was 
only occasionally used as a hideout by pirates at the time. Was Crawfurd’s 
description of Singapore’s past an accurate one? Had Singapore been just a
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 20) ---
sleepy and unimportant island before 1819? You will learn more about the 
history of early Singapore in this chapter.Chapter at a Glance
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 21) ---
The decline of 
Srivijaya begins with 
the invasion by the 
Chola Kingdom in 
India.Regional and Global Developments That Impacted SingaporeSrivijayac. 650–c. 1370sMajor Kingdoms/
Empires in the Region
Srivijaya emerges as  
the dominant kingdom  
in the Malay Archipelago.
 Bronze statue from 
the Srivijayan periodAccording to the 
Sejarah Melayu,  
Sang Nila Utama,  
also known as  
Sri Tri Buana,  
arrives in Temasek  
and renames the 
island Singapura.
 The Sejarah Melayu also
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 21) ---
island Singapura.
 The Sejarah Melayu also  
records that Sang Nila Utama 
was a Palembang prince from  
Srivijaya.Parameswara (also known  
as Iskandar Shah), a prince 
from Palembang, establishes  
a trading port at Melaka.  
 Artist’s impression of Melaka  
in the 15th centuryMajapahitc. 1290s–c. 1510s
682 1025 c. 1299 c. 1400
12
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Timeline
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 22) ---
Melaka falls to 
the Portuguese.
The Melaka Sultan’s son, 
Sultan Alauddin Riayat 
Shah II, establishes  
the Johor Sultanate.
The Dutch establish a 
permanent trading base in 
Batavia (present-day Jakarta).Melaka falls 
to the Dutch.
The Johor Sultan, 
Mahmud Shah II, is 
assassinated, plunging 
the Sultanate into a 
political crisis.
Conflict between 
the Dutch, Spanish 
and Portuguese 
in Southeast Asia 
intensifies as they 
compete for trade
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 22) ---
intensifies as they 
compete for trade 
and colonies.Johor Sultanate1528–Early 19th century
 Dutch-Portuguese battle in the 
Straits of Melaka in 1606 View of Batavia, c. 1754European voyages of 
discovery and economic 
expansion result in the 
growing conflict and 
competition between 
the European maritime 
countries extending 
into Asia.
 Vasco da Gama sails from 
Europe around the Cape of 
Good Hope to India in 1497.Melaka Sultanatec. 1400–1511
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 22) ---
1490s–1500s 1600s–1640s 1511 1619 1641 1699 1528
13
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 23) ---
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CHRONOLOGY
Chronology refers to the arrangement of past events according to the order in which they took place. 
Historians place events in chronological order to help them better understand what happened during 
a specific time period in the past. This can be done by arranging events based on the year in which  
they occurred.
Decade
A decade refers to  
a period of 10 years.
1 CE 101 CE 110 CE 501 CE 600 CECentury
A century refers to a period of 100 years.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 23) ---
A century refers to a period of 100 years.
The 6th century CE therefore refers to the years 501–600 CE,  
and the 21st century CE to the years 2001–2100 CE.
Millennium
A millennium refers to a period of 1,000 years.
The 1st millennium CE therefore refers to the years 1–1000 CE, 
and the 2nd millennium CE to the years 1001–2000 CE.BCE
Years are traditionally numbered with reference to the 
year of the birth of Jesus Christ. Previously, the term
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 23) ---
“BC”, which refers to “Before Christ”, was used. Recently, 
some historians have begun to number years more 
neutrally, without religious references. Hence, the period 
BC is referred to as “Before Common Era” or “BCE”.CE
“CE” is short for “Common Era”. 1 CE is the 
year Christ was born. Previously, the term 
“AD” or “Anno Domini”, which is Latin for “in 
the year of the Lord”, was used.
BCE CE1 BCE 2 BCE 3 BCE 1 CE 2 CE 3 CE
Timeline
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 23) ---
Amy Lim
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how historians 
understand time @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc101.
14
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 24) ---
1000 CE1368–1644 CE
Ming dynasty
1685–1815 CE
The Enlightenment1837–1901 CE 
Victorian era 2000 CE
Periods
Another way of referring to different times in history is to divide it 
into periods. Periods may be named after significant developments 
that happened then. For example, some historians regard the period 
between 1685 and 1815 for Europe as the Age of Reason or the 
Enlightenment due to the scientific, cultural, philosophical and political
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 24) ---
developments that occurred there during this period.Reigns or Dynasties
One way of referring to different 
times in history is to categorise them 
according to the reigns of individual 
rulers or entire dynasties. For example, 
the Ming dynasty refers to the years  
1368–1644 CE in China, when the country 
was ruled by the Ming emperors, while 
the Victorian era in British history refers 
to the period 1837–1901 CE, when Queen 
Victoria was the ruler of Great Britain.
Other Ways of Marking Time
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 24) ---
Other Ways of Marking Time
Different calendars are also used to 
organise the year, such as the Chinese 
lunar calendar.
 Portrait of Emperor Taizu, founder of the  
Ming dynasty, who reigned from 1368 to 1398
 Present-day version of the Chinese lunar calendar 1843 portrait of Queen Victoria, who reigned from 
1837 to 1901. The British Empire expanded greatly 
during the Victorian era.
15
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 25) ---
How Did Singapore’s Geographical 
Location Affect Its Connections 
with the Region and the World?
In our journey to understand our past, it is important to constantly bear 
in mind where Singapore is located. Singapore is part of the region of 
Southeast Asia, which lies to the south of China and east of India. 
These two large countries were home to old and influential civilisations 
which traded extensively throughout the region and beyond. For example,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 25) ---
Chinese goods, such as silk and ceramics, were in demand as far away as 
Europe, while products from Southeast Asia, such as spices, scented wood 
and shells, were highly valuable in China and India.
 Examples of goods traded between Southeast Asia and the rest of the world Ceramic vase  Silk
 Scented wood Spices Turtle shell
16
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 26) ---
During ancient times, the most important trade link between the 
civilisations of Asia, the Middle East and Europe was the network of 
land routes known as the Silk Road. This route connected China through  
Central Asia to the Roman Empire, which controlled much of the Middle 
East and Europe for many centuries.
However, this route became less safe for traders due to increased danger 
and difficulties involved in travelling across the Silk Road. They had to rely
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 26) ---
instead on travelling via the maritime route.
CHINA
INDIA MIDDLE EAST
AFRICAASIAEUROPE
Chang’anSilk Road
GuangzhouRome
Mediterranean Sea
INDIAN OCEAN
Legend
Land route
Maritime route
 Map 1.1: Land and maritime routes connecting Asia, the Middle East and Europe during ancient timesN
 Artist's impression of camels carrying people and 
goods along the Silk RoadThe term “Silk Road” was only coined 
after the mid-19th century. In 1877, 
the German traveller Ferdinand
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 26) ---
the German traveller Ferdinand 
von Richthofen used the term to 
describe the network of land routes. 
Coincidentally, the ancient Greeks 
referred to China as “Seres” , which 
literally means “land of silk” .DID YOU KNOW?
South 
China Sea
17
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 27) ---
LEARN A SKILL: READING MAPS
A map is a graphical representation of all or part of the world’s surface. It gives a bird’s eye view of the 
world. Reading and understanding maps are important in the study of history. Historians use maps to 
understand how geography influenced developments in history. Let us learn more about how geography 
influenced Singapore’s history by studying the map below. Follow the guide on the next page to help you.
CHINA
INDIAN OCEANSouth China SeaINDIA
VIETNAM
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 27) ---
CHINA
INDIAN OCEANSouth China SeaINDIA
VIETNAM
THE PHILIPPINES
SINGAPOREMALAYSIA
INDONESIALAOS
THAILAND
CAMBODIAMYANMARHanoi
Vientiane
Phnom PenhBangkokNay Pyi TawDhaka
Colombo
Kuala Lumpur
JakartaBandarSeri BegawanManilaGuangzhou
Melaka
PalembangBANGLADESH
SRI LANKA
BRUNEI
 Map 1.2: Map showing present-day Southeast Asia, India and ChinaLegend
Capital city
City
0 350 700 1,050
KMN
Straits of Melaka
18
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 28) ---
The areas of land on the map are coloured to represent 
different countries, and important cities and other features 
are labelled. Can you locate the following countries on 
Map 1.2?
• China
• India
• Indonesia
• Malaysia
• SingaporeCountries1
The blue areas of the map represent water bodies, such as 
the oceans and seas. Two important water bodies in the 
region are the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea.
• Can you locate the Indian Ocean and the South China 
Sea on the map?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 28) ---
Sea on the map?
• What are the places that a traveller sailing from China 
to India might pass?Water Bodies 2
The legend at the bottom of the map tells you what  
the different symbols on the map represent. In this map, 
the legend shows the two symbols that represent capital 
cities and cities in the different countries. A capital city 
is where the main government offices of a country are 
located.Legend3Some maps come with a scale, which helps you to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 28) ---
calculate distances. For a large area to be represented on 
a piece of paper, it is necessary to scale down the actual 
size of the area. The scale refers to the proportion by 
which a map has been reduced and tells you the distance 
represented by each unit of measurement on the map. 
For example, in Map 1.2, the scale at the bottom tells you 
that 1 cm on the map represents 350 km in real life. With 
this, you can measure the actual distances between places 
on the map.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 28) ---
on the map.
Calculate the distance across the South China Sea 
between Singapore and the port of Guangzhou in China. 
How about the distance between Singapore and Melaka?Distances 4
LEARN ON THE GO
Sharpen your  
map-reading skills @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc102 .
19
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 29) ---
Many trading centres emerged in Southeast Asia in response to this trade. 
Travellers from China, India, the Middle East and Southeast Asia who 
passed through this region would stop at various ports to pick up items to 
trade, acquire supplies such as food and water, repair their ships or wait for 
favourable weather conditions before continuing on their journeys.
SRIVIJAYASumatra
JavaBorneoMalay Peninsula
PalembangTemasek
INDIAN OCEANSouth China Sea
Legend
Srivijaya, c. 1200
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 29) ---
Legend
Srivijaya, c. 1200
 Map 1.3: Founded in Sumatra, Srivijaya was situated close to the southern entrance of the Straits of Melaka and possessed a good port at Palembang. By suppressing 
piracy and serving as a centre for the trade of local products such as spices and scented wood, Srivijaya extended its control over many parts of the region.Sunda StraitsN
Straits of Melaka
20
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 30) ---
MELAKA SULTANATE
Sumatra
JavaBorneoMalay Peninsula
SingaporeMelaka
INDIAN OCEANSouth China Sea
Legend
Melaka Sultanate, 
late 15th century
 Map 1.4: Located along the Straits of Melaka, Melaka provided a convenient stop and a safe harbour for traders passing through the Straits. Goods from India, 
Southeast Asia and China were brought to Melaka where they were bought and sold. These included dyes, porcelain and cloth such as silk.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 30) ---
Illustration showing a view of Batavia (present-day Jakarta, founded by the Dutch in 1619 on the island of Java) in the 18th century by Jan van RyneOver time, the wealth gained from trade allowed some of these 
ports to grow into small kingdoms, also known as maritime kingdoms.  
Two examples in Southeast Asia were Srivijaya and the Melaka Sultanate. Look 
at Maps 1.3 and 1.4. Are you able to identify the changes that took place in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 30) ---
Southeast Asia when the region was under Srivijaya and the Melaka Sultanate?
Sunda StraitsN
Straits of Melaka
21
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 31) ---
Singapore’s location also allowed it to benefit from the monsoon winds, 
which are seasonal rain-bearing winds. In the days of sailing ships, journeys 
by sea were almost entirely dependent upon wind patterns. The southwest 
monsoons blow from June to September, while the northeast monsoons 
blow from December to March. Map 1.5 below explains how the prevailing 
monsoons determined the course of trade.
 Map 1.5: Ships leaving China for Southeast  
Asia and the Indian Ocean had to catch the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 31) ---
Asia and the Indian Ocean had to catch the  
northeast monsoon, which would take them  
west. On the other hand, ships departing from  
Indian Ocean ports for China via Southeast  
Asia would have to make use of the southwest 
monsoon. If ships caught the monsoons at the  
right time, the strong winds would allow them  
to complete their voyages quickly.Let us examine the map of Southeast Asia below to understand how the 
island of Singapore was involved in this maritime trade.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 31) ---
Countries with economic interests in Asia would place great importance 
on the Straits of Melaka. Control of the Straits would allow them to 
move their ships quickly and safely within and beyond Asia. In different 
historical periods, the Chinese, Portuguese, Dutch, British and Japanese 
would attempt to control the Straits to secure maritime routes for their 
ships between the South China Sea 
and Indian Ocean. These attempts 
to control the Straits were a key
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 31) ---
to control the Straits were a key 
factor in shaping the development 
of Singapore over the centuries.Singapore lies off the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, along a waterway 
known as the Straits of Melaka. Ships sailing from China to India and 
beyond would have to pass through the Straits of Melaka as the quickest 
route to their destinations. This reduced the amount and cost of supplies 
they needed, such as food and water, as well as the risk of pirate attacks
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 31) ---
and accidents. Other routes through the islands further east, in what is 
today’s Indonesia, would take a longer time to complete.The travelling time of sailing ships 
in early times depended on many 
factors. While longer distances 
generally meant a longer travelling 
time, other factors also affected how 
long it would take to get from port 
to port. For example, ships had to 
wait for favourable wind and weather 
conditions before setting sail. They 
might even have had to stop at other
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 31) ---
might even have had to stop at other 
ports along the way to replenish 
supplies or take shelter during a storm.DID YOU KNOW?
What problems did sea 
travellers in the past face? 
Would sea travellers face the 
same problems today?
Think!
CHINA
SingaporeSouth 
China SeaGuangzhou
PACIFIC OCEAN
Straits of Melaka
Sunda StraitsINDIAN OCEANSumatra
JavaBorneoMalay Peninsula
Melaka
Palembang
Legend
Route taken by ships 
between China and IndiaNortheast monsoons (Dec–Mar)
Southwest monsoons (Jun–Sep)N
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 31) ---
Southwest monsoons (Jun–Sep)N
To India
22
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 32) ---
Over time, it grew into a powerful empire * that 
brought stability to places controlled by it.
Its strong navy suppressed piracy within 
its empire, making it safer for ships to sail 
and trade in the region.PalembangSoutheast Asia was positioned to benefit 
from the maritime trade taking place 
between China and the rest of the world.
This trade enabled several trading centres  
to emerge and develop throughout the region.How did EARLY SINGAPORE become How did EARLY SINGAPORE become
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 32) ---
an IMPORTANT TRADING CENTRE ?an IMPORTANT TRADING CENTRE ?
Srivijaya developed around the 
port of Palembang in Sumatra.
* An empire is a group of territories 
controlled by a single ruler.SRIVIJAYA
23
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 33) ---
However, from the 11th century onwards, Srivijaya started to 
decline due to external threats, such as invasions from …
the Chola Kingdom 
of southern India,
Due to the decline of Srivijaya, trade shifted 
northwards and ports in the area benefitted.During this period, trade between China 
and Southeast Asia also increased.
These factors contributed to the rise of early 
Singapore, also known as Temasek then,  
as a trading centre in the 14th century.the Siamese Kingdom
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 33) ---
(present-day Thailand),and Majapahit, which 
was based in Java.
24
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 34) ---
The story of Sang Nila Utama, also known as Sri Tri Buana, comes from a 17th-century text known as the Sejarah Melayu (Malay 
Annals). It tells the story of a prince who left Palembang for an island to the north. When he arrived at the island called Temasek, 
he spotted a lion. 
This is an adapted passage from the Sejarah Melayu that describes this event: 
Near the mouth of the river Temasek, Sang Nila Utama and his attendants saw an extremely beautiful animal,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 34) ---
its body of a red colour, its head black and its breast white, extremely agile and of great strength. Sang Nila Utama 
enquired what animal this was, and was informed that the ancient histories described the singha, or lion, in the  
same manner. Believing that this was a fine place to contain so fierce and powerful an animal, Sang Nila Utama decided 
to form a settlement in the country of Temasek.
 Examples of goods sought after by the Chinese Hornbill casqueIvory Cotton
 Sea cucumbers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 34) ---
Sea cucumbers
DID YOU KNOW?
25
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 35) ---
How do we know about early Singapore’s connections with the region 
and the world? 
Historians use a variety of sources that provide us with information 
about Singapore’s past. Sources can come in many forms. There are:
• textual records, which provide written information about the past;
• archaeological finds, which reveal the nature of economic activities, 
social hierarchies and religions;
• maps, which show us the geographical importance of places; and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 35) ---
• scientific data, which tells us about changes in the environment.
Let us see what various sources tell us about early Singapore’s 
connections with the region and the world.BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: EVIDENCE
This textual source tells 
us about the connections 
between early Singapore 
and China. Using Wang 
Dayuan's text, we can 
conclude that Singapore 
was among the ports 
visited by Chinese traders 
in the 14th century.
Wang Dayuan was a Chinese traveller who visited
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 35) ---
Wang Dayuan was a Chinese traveller who visited 
Singapore in the early 14th century. The record of his 
travels, written in 1349, describes communities of 
natives and Chinese living on the island, the agricultural 
activity they conducted, as well as the fact that some 
were pirates.
TEXTUAL RECORDS
Pieces of Chinese ceramics were discovered at Empress 
Place, near the Singapore River. These shards came 
from bowls, plates and cups which were produced in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 35) ---
China during the 13th to 15th centuries.ARCHAEOLOGICAL FINDSThese shards indicate that 
Singapore was connected 
to the trade network in the 
region. Different traders 
bought and sold Chinese 
ceramics, which were 
typical trade items. The 
fact that these Chinese 
ceramics were found in 
Singapore suggests that 
there was trade between 
Singapore and the region.LEARN ON THE GO
Explore the different 
types of historical 
evidence @  
go.gov.sg/lshc103.
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
26
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 35) ---
go.gov.sg/lshc103.
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
26
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 36) ---
HOW WAS  
EARLY SINGAPORE  
CONNECTED TO   
THE REGION AND   
THE WORLD?This map shows that 
Singapore was known to 
European travellers in the 
16th and 17th centuries, who 
frequently used the waters 
around Singapore in their 
journeys through the region. 
Singapore was thus part 
of the trade network that 
connected Europe and Asia 
in this period.
Tree rings like these suggest 
changes in climate that 
could have impacted the 
accessibility of maritime 
routes, and caused famine
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 36) ---
routes, and caused famine 
and drought in the region, 
e.g., in China. Singapore’s 
trade would have suffered in 
such periods.
Manuel Godinho de Erédia was a cartographer, 
or mapmaker, who served the King of Spain. 
He produced many maps of countries in Asia. 
This map of Singapore was drawn in the 1600s, 
and depicts the coastline of Singapore, with 
some place names similar to those still being 
used today.
MAPS
Scientific evidence, such as tree ring records,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 36) ---
Scientific evidence, such as tree ring records, 
allows us to understand the patterns of wind 
and rain in Asia in the last thousand years. 
For example, a larger gap between tree rings 
indicates that there was plentiful rainfall in 
a certain year, while a smaller gap suggests 
drought had taken place.SCIENTIFIC DATA
27
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 37) ---
Artefacts at Fort Canning Hill
Besides the discovery of gold ornaments during excavation works for a 
reservoir in 1928, the oldest visible remnants of the past are the fort gate and 
the old British cemetery. The keramat (ceremonial grave) of Iskandar Shah 
was also found here. He was supposedly the fifth ancient ruler of Temasek. 
Approximately 30,000 artefacts from the 14th century were recorded at the site. 
Glass beads form a large proportion of these artefacts.
 Blue and white stem cup,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 37) ---
Blue and white stem cup, 
14th century
 Gold earrings and armlet, mid-14th century. 
The armlet has a design of Kala, the Hindu 
god representing time and destruction.
 Glass beads, 14th century
Archaeology is the study of the physical remains of past human 
societies. Archaeological digs since the 1920s have uncovered artefacts at  
Fort Canning and other areas around the Singapore River. Among the 
artefacts found were shards of expensive Chinese porcelain and gold
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 37) ---
ornaments. This is evidence that there was trade between early Singapore 
and the region. Read on to find out about the various artefacts uncovered 
from the excavation sites in Singapore.
River Valley RoadOrchard Road
Fort Canning Hill
Fort  
Canning  
Park
Hong Lim ParkMerchant Road
Havelock Road
New Bridge RoadCross Street
 Map 1.6: Present-day map showing the location of excavation sites around the Singapore River
28
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 38) ---
Victoria啊Street
Bras Basah Road
Hill StreetStamford Road
Empress PlaceParliament House Complex
Artefacts at Empress Place
Excavation work was conducted at this site in 1998 and 2015. The artefacts 
found provide more evidence about pre-1819 Singapore.
 Ceramic shards with design motifs  
in underglazed blue, 19th century Majapahit-style headless 
horseman, c. 14th century
Artefacts at Parliament House Complex
Excavations at this site between 1994 and 1995 revealed artefacts dating from
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 38) ---
before the British colonial period. Among the artefacts is a large collection of 
Chinese porcelain dating from the late 13th to the early 15th century.
 Dehua plate fragment, 14th century White stem cup fragment,  
12th–14th century
 Mercury jar, 14th century
Singapore River
29
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 39) ---
The prosperity of early Singapore, however, 
did not last. By the middle of the 14th century, 
Singapore had started to decline and would 
soon be overshadowed by a new port city to 
its north: Melaka.
One major reason for its decline could have 
been the climatic and economic changes 
that affected the trade with China. Scientific 
evidence shows us that weather patterns 
underwent severe changes in the 14th century. 
This contributed to droughts and famines in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 39) ---
This contributed to droughts and famines in 
China. As the Chinese economy collapsed 
under this strain, trade between Southeast Asia 
and China would have suffered accordingly. This 
probably reduced one of the major sources of 
early Singapore’s wealth.
Like Srivijaya, Singapore also fell prey to 
external threats. As a small island, it was always 
vulnerable to the larger powers in the region. 
We have already seen how invasions from 
hostile kingdoms brought about the downfall of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 39) ---
hostile kingdoms brought about the downfall of 
Srivijaya. Similarly, the Kingdoms of Majapahit 
and Ayutthaya (in Thailand) launched attacks 
on Temasek that weakened it by the end of the  
14th century.
In c. 1400, the Melaka Sultanate was founded 
along the Straits of Melaka, north of Singapore. 
The Sultanate became one of the dominant 
trading centres in the region, and soon extended 
control over much of the Malay Peninsula and 
Sumatra. Like Singapore, Melaka was situated
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 39) ---
Sumatra. Like Singapore, Melaka was situated 
in a convenient location for traders travelling 
between the Indian Ocean and the South China 
Sea, providing them with a safe harbour during 
their long voyages. See the following page for 
the story of Melaka’s founding.Why Had Singapore Declined  
by the 15th Century?
 Detail from a relief in Fort Canning Park in 
Singapore showing warriors in early Singapore 
fighting off attackers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 39) ---
fighting off attackers
 Map 1.7: Areas controlled by the Melaka SultanateMELAKA SULTANATE
Malay Peninsula
Singapore
INDIAN OCEANSouth China Sea
Legend
Melaka Sultanate, 
late 15th centuryStraits of Melaka
Melaka
Sumatra
N
30
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 40) ---
Faced with an invasion by the allies of Temasek, he fled 
the island and went north into the Malay Peninsula.
One day, while resting under a tree when 
out hunting, Parameswara witnessed a small 
mousedeer bravely fighting off his hunting dogs.Parameswara believed that the bravery  
of the mousedeer was a sign that this 
was a good place to establish a city.
This was how the city of Melaka came to be founded.He asked his men for the name of the tree he was
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 40) ---
resting under, and was told that it was a Melaka tree.
Parameswara, 
a prince from 
Palembang, 
had overthrown 
the ruler of 
Temasek.The FOUNDING of MELAKAThe FOUNDING of MELAKA
31
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 41) ---
Parameswara’s conversion to Islam and marriage to a Muslim princess from 
Sumatra also attracted Muslim traders to Melaka. Furthermore, Parameswara 
established Melaka’s status as a vassal of China. This meant that it would 
pay tribute2 to the Chinese emperor in return for protection. This gave 
Melaka security from threats posed by rivals in the region. The peace  
that Melaka enjoyed allowed it to grow as a trading centre, attracting
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 41) ---
traders from Sumatra, India and the Middle East. Trade with Europe also 
grew in importance, and this brought European fleets to Southeast Asia  
in greater frequency and numbers.
During this period, Singapore was overshadowed by Melaka and ceased 
to serve its previous role as a centre of trade linking the Indian Ocean and  
the South China Sea. However, it was still important to the Melaka 
Sultanate as it was home to the Orang Laut, a seafaring people who were
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 41) ---
the backbone of Melaka’s naval forces.
The term “Orang Laut” means “people of the sea” . The Orang Laut lived on 
houseboats and wandered about from place to place, usually in search of good 
fishing grounds where they could catch fish and other sea animals.
 17th-century drawing of how the Orang Laut warriors of the Sultan may have looked likeAfter Sultan Muzaffar Shah, the third 
ruler of Melaka, established Islam as 
the official religion of Melaka in the 
middle of the 15th century, Islam
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 41) ---
middle of the 15th century, Islam 
began to have a significant influence 
on the art of Southeast Asia.
For example, prior to the arrival of 
Islam, Southeast Asian woodcarving 
was influenced by Hinduism and 
depicted deities and creatures as 
symbols. However, as Islam forbade 
such depictions, floral designs and 
Arabic inscriptions from the Quran 
were subsequently featured instead.
 Floral motif carving on the main door of 
Tranquerah Mosque, Melaka, built in 1728DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 41) ---
DID YOU KNOW?
2 To pay tribute is to send valuable gifts to a more powerful ruler, usually of a larger territory, as a form of respect.
32
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 42) ---
The Arrival of the Europeans
At the beginning of the 16th century, religious, political 
and economic rivalries were intensifying among 
the major powers of Europe. With the voyages of 
discovery in the late 15th century in which European 
sailors opened new maritime routes into Asia and 
other parts of the world, this conflict and competition 
began spreading into Asia.
Some famous voyages were those of Christopher 
Columbus, who landed in North America, 
and Vasco da Gama, who established a
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 42) ---
and Vasco da Gama, who established a 
maritime route from Europe to India, 
passing around the Cape of Good Hope 
in the south of Africa (see Map 1.8). This 
route to India was particularly important 
as it allowed Europeans to bypass the 
eastern Mediterranean, which was under 
the control of the Ottoman Turks. The 
Ottoman Turks were constantly at war with 
the European countries in this period.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 42) ---
the European countries in this period.
 Map 1.8: Newly discovered maritime route connecting Europe with Asia in the late 15th centuryINDIAPORTUGALOTTOMAN 
EMPIREEUROPE
AFRICAASIA
INDIAN OCEANATLANTIC OCEANMediterranean Sea
Cape of Good HopeLisbon
KozhikodeGoa
Legend
Route of Vasco da 
Gama’s 1st voyage from 
Europe to India in 1497 Christopher Columbus  Vasco da Gama
N
33
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 43) ---
The rivalry between the maritime nations of Spain, Portugal and the 
Netherlands began to focus on Asia as they raced to tap its markets 
and establish trading settlements across the region. Accompanying the 
European presence were many Christian missionaries who ventured into 
India, Southeast Asia and China.
From the 16th century onwards, while European influence was growing 
in the region, the Melaka Sultanate was weakened and divided by
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 43) ---
power struggles and internal rivalries. This made the kingdom vulnerable. 
When the Portuguese decided to take over Melaka, their well-armed 
forces easily conquered the city. With a loyal group of officials and Orang 
Laut warriors, the Sultan fled south. His successor would establish a new 
kingdom along the Johor River, which came to be known as the Johor 
Sultanate.
 Detail from a 17th-century Dutch painting by  
Jan Martszen de Jonge depicting a battle between
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 43) ---
Jan Martszen de Jonge depicting a battle between 
Dutch and Spanish troopsOne of the Catholic missionary orders 
founded during the 16th century was 
the Society of Jesus, also known as 
the Jesuits. One of their most famous 
members, Francis Xavier, who was 
instrumental in spreading Christianity 
in Asia, passed through the waters 
off Singapore in 1551 while returning 
from Japan to the Portuguese-
controlled port of Goa in India.
During the rule of the Qing dynasty,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 43) ---
During the rule of the Qing dynasty,  
the Jesuits also established themselves 
in China, where they introduced 
Western inventions, such as 
mechanical clocks, and European 
techniques of art to the Chinese elite.
DID YOU KNOW?
 Francis Xavier
 Map 1.9: This map shows the outposts established by the European powers by the late 17th century. 
Outposts are places that represent a government or a trading company that is located far away. The late
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 43) ---
15th century saw the arrival of European powers in Asia who began to create permanent outposts  in places 
such as Goa, Melaka, Manila and Macao. By the 18th century, the Dutch were the dominant European power 
in Asia and controlled a vast empire that spanned the islands of present-day Indonesia.Bombay (Mumbai)
Goa
Colombo
Batavia (Jakarta)PalembangMelakaMacao
ManilaINDIACHINA
INDIAN OCEANSouth China Sea
Legend
British possession
Dutch possession
Portuguese possession
Spanish possessionN
34
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 43) ---
Portuguese possession
Spanish possessionN
34
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 44) ---
Accounts are writings about events that happened in the past. Different accounts may exist about the same 
historical event. Why is it important for historians to look at more than one account of an event? Let us look 
at two accounts of Parameswara’s escape from Singapore to Melaka.
These two accounts provide very different details about the invasion 
of Singapore and Parameswara’s escape. What are some differences  
in the accounts?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 44) ---
in the accounts?
We would not have known about the other possible version of events if 
we had read only one account. Hence, it is important to look at different 
accounts to consider other ways that events might have occurred.
Why do you think these two accounts tell us different details about the 
same events?BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: ACCOUNTS
In the Sejarah Melayu, we are told that Iskandar Shah 
(Parameswara) succeeded to the throne of Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 44) ---
His minister, Sang Ranjuna Tapa, had a daughter 
whom the King loved. But the King’s mistresses 
schemed against her and accused her of unfaithfulness.  
Iskandar Shah had her executed. Sang Ranjuna Tapa was 
deeply saddened and sent a letter to Java, seeking the 
help of the Majapahit for revenge. The Majapahit forces 
arrived, engaged in battle and subdued Singapore. 
Iskandar Shah fled from Singapore to Muar (in Johor).
In the Suma Oriental, written by a Portuguese traveller
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 44) ---
in the early 16th century, Parameswara is supposed 
to have killed the King of Singapore shortly after  
he arrived on the island. He took control of the island 
and the waters around it. However, the King of Siam, 
who was father-in-law to the King of Singapore, 
decided to attack him. Parameswara did not dare to 
confront him and fled with about a thousand men up the  
Muar River (in Johor).ACCOUNT 1  
SEJARAH MELA YUACCOUNT 2  
SUMA ORIENTAL
 Sejarah Melayu ( Sulalat al-Salatin),
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 44) ---
Sejarah Melayu ( Sulalat al-Salatin),  
edited by Munshi Abdullah, Singapore, 1840 Pages from the Suma Oriental
LEARN ON THE GO
Go deeper into the 
importance of  
historical accounts @  
go.gov.sg/lshc104.
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
35
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 45) ---
Under the Johor Sultanate, Singapore revived some of its trading functions 
that had been lost during the period of Melaka’s dominance.
During this period, several European travellers, such as Tomé Pires,  
Manuel Godinho de Erédia and Jacques de Coutre, wrote about an official 
known by the title of Shahbandar3 based in Singapore. The presence of a 
Shahbandar indicates that Singapore could have been an important trading
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 45) ---
centre for the Johor Sultanate as his duty was to oversee foreign trading 
communities and issue trading licences to foreign traders.
At the same time, there is evidence of trade between the Johor 
Sultanate and China during this period. A 17th-century Chinese map 
depicts shipping routes from the main Chinese port of Quanzhou 
to different parts of Asia. One such route is shown leading to Johor. 
Archaeological evidence supports this. Chinese porcelain from the 17th
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 45) ---
century found in the Kallang River suggests that items made in China 
were being traded in and around Singapore, and similar porcelain has 
also been uncovered in Johor. Singapore was therefore the gateway for 
a system of trade that passed from China through Singapore and down  
the Johor River.How Important Was Singapore 
Under the Johor Sultanate?
 17th-century Chinese porcelain, found 
in the Kallang River c. 1970
 Map 1.10: 17th-century Portuguese map depicting the region around Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 45) ---
and Johor, by Manuel Godinho de Erédia  The term “Xabandaria” (Shahbandar), 
marked near the Singapore River on this 
Portuguese map, indicates the presence 
of a Shahbandar in Singapore.
3 The Shahbandar, or “Lord of the Haven” in Persian, is similar to today’s port master of a harbour. The Shahbandar was a 
representative and official of the Johor Sultanate stationed in Singapore. Appointed by the Johor Sultan, he was in charge
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 45) ---
of managing and controlling a harbour or port in Singapore. He also performed gatekeeping duties, which included meeting 
traders before they proceeded upriver to the capital of the Johor Sultanate.
36
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 46) ---
What Caused Singapore to 
Decline Again?
ConclusionSingapore declined in importance from the mid-17th century due to 
political changes in the region. After 1610, the Dutch turned their attention 
southwards towards the Sunda Straits and Java, away from the Straits 
of Melaka. The Dutch also established their main base in Asia at Batavia 
(present-day Jakarta) in 1619. They became the dominant European power 
in Southeast Asia after capturing Melaka from the Portuguese in 1641. By
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 46) ---
the 18th century, maritime traffic was bypassing Singapore.
Another factor for Singapore’s decline was the political crisis that resulted 
from the assassination of the childless Sultan Mahmud Shah II in 1699. 
This ended the dynasty of Sultans who claimed to be from the direct  
bloodline of Sang Nila Utama. The capital of the Johor Sultanate later 
shifted to Riau, and Bintan developed as the main regional emporium.4 
By this time, trade had moved decisively away from Singapore. Since the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 46) ---
Johor capital was no longer in the Johor River region, there was no longer 
need for a Shahbandar in Singapore.
By the 18th century, Riau and other regional ports had replaced Singapore 
as centres of trade that linked the Indian Ocean with the South China Sea. 
As Singapore had lost its importance, shipping now bypassed the island. 
Singapore and the nearby coastal regions became sparsely populated 
places where the inhabitants lived off the sea and pirates visited to raid 
or hide.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 46) ---
or hide.
Was Singapore always such a sparsely populated island and only 
occasionally used as a hideout by pirates as described by John Crawfurd 
(see page 11)? While we have established in this chapter that early 
Singapore certainly had connections with the region and the world 
at different periods of its history, there is incomplete evidence to 
show the extent of these connections. In the next chapter, you 
will find out how Singapore became a British trading post.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 46) ---
4 An emporium is a centre of trade and business activities. Early 17-century painting by Hendrick Cornelisz 
Vroom of Dutch ships that operated in 
Southeast Asia
37
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 47) ---
After going through the chapter, you may wish to use this diagram to help you summarise what you have 
learnt about early Singapore’s history.
Plot a graph showing how well-connected and important you 
think Singapore was in its early history. Include phrases and 
words in your graph to describe Singapore at those different 
points of time. The first plot has been done as an example!Highly 
connected 
and very 
important
YearLimited 
connections 
and 
unimportant
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 47) ---
YearLimited 
connections 
and 
unimportant
1299 Early 19th centuryI think that Singapore 
was quite connected 
and important around 
1299. It was growing as 
an important trading 
centre because of 
Srivijaya’s decline and 
trade with China.LET’S REVIEW
Use the dates to think about the changes in Singapore’s fortunes over time.  
(Refer to the timeline at the start of the chapter to help you.)
LEARN ON THE GO
Explore Singapore’s 
early connections 
further @  
go.gov.sg/lshc105.
38
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 47) ---
further @  
go.gov.sg/lshc105.
38
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 48) ---
CASE INVESTIGATION
In the following chapter, you will 
learn about the establishment of a 
British trading post in Singapore in 
1819. You already know that some 
Europeans, such as the Portuguese 
and the Dutch, had been in Southeast 
Asia since the 16th century and that 
their presence grew steadily in the 
following centuries. The Portuguese 
controlled Melaka for over a century, 
and the Dutch had established a vast 
empire in the East Indies (present-
day Indonesia) by the 17th century.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 48) ---
day Indonesia) by the 17th century.
However, during this period, were 
the Portuguese and the Dutch 
interested in Singapore? Read the 
following sources to find out more.
By the beginning of the 17th century, the Portuguese and the Dutch were fighting over the waters around Singapore. The 
Dutch wished to challenge the Portuguese and Spanish control of trade in many parts of the world. In Southeast Asia,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 48) ---
the Dutch attacked Portuguese trading fleets* approaching the waters around Singapore while en route from Macao [in 
China] to Melaka.
– Adapted from an account by historians Tan Tai Yong, Kwa Chong Guan and Derek Heng of the conflict  
in the waters around Singapore during the 16th and 17th centuries, published in 2009 
* A fleet is a group of ships.SOURCE AHow interested were the Europeans in Singapore before 1819?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 48) ---
Detail from a 17th-century map depicting a battle between the Portuguese and the Dutch on the 
eastern coast of Singapore in 1603
39
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 49) ---
In the middle of the Singapore Straits, there is an island [present-day Sentosa]. Your Majesty should order 
that a very strong fortress* be built here. One side of the Strait is so narrow that it can be closed off with a 
chain; the other is wider, but no ship can pass through either of these Straits without being in close distance 
of the fortress, which can then sink them using their cannons. This is the best way to destroy the Dutch
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 49) ---
rebels. If Your Majesty were to send 40 ships, it would be more likely to put an end to the Dutch who are in the  
East Indies.
– Adapted from a letter by European trader Jacques de Coutre to the Spanish King, written in 1610
* A fortress is a place or building set up for defence against enemy attacks.SOURCE B
The Dutch East India Company recognised the importance of the Singapore Straits and its surrounding lands
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 49) ---
and islands when they arrived in the Straits region. After much thinking, they decided not to establish a base 
in the Singapore-Johor region. From then on, the Dutch would focus on the Sunda Straits and northwestern 
Java instead.
– Adapted from an account by historian Peter Borschberg of the Dutch search  
for a base for their operations in Southeast Asia in the 1600s, published in 2016SOURCE D
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 49) ---
Johor is unsuitable as a base, because one cannot reach it every time of the year. It is important for a base to 
be established at a location which will not be too affected by monsoon winds. I cannot think of a better place 
than in the Strait of Sunda or Banten [in the west of Java]. We can always get there easily, once we have 
passed the Cape of Good Hope. I had an eye on the islands of Jeyakerta [Jakarta], which are very well situated
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 49) ---
for defence as well as good locations from which to manage everything.
– Adapted from a letter by Dutch Admiral Matelieff de Jonge commenting on instructions  
by the Dutch East India Company Directors to look into the establishment of a base  
in the region of the Johor River, close to Singapore, written in 1610SOURCE C
40
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 50) ---
1. Read Source A. Why were the Portuguese and Dutch “fighting over the waters around Singapore”?
2. Read Source B. Why did the European trader Jacques de Coutre suggest building a very strong fortress 
“in the middle of the Singapore Straits”?
3. Read Sources C and D. How interested were the Dutch in establishing a base in Singapore?
Having read all the sources, rate on a scale of 1 to 4 how interested the Portuguese and the Dutch were in 
Singapore in the 16th to 18th centuries.INVESTIGATE!
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 50) ---
REPORT!
Not at all interested A little interested Somewhat interested Very interested1 2 3 4
Write down one to two sentences to explain the rating that you have indicated above. Share your 
response with a classmate.
I think that the Portuguese and the Dutch were __________________ interested in Singapore in the 
16th to 18th centuries as …
41
HOW CONNECTED WAS EARLY SINGAPORE TO THE REGION AND THE WORLD?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 52) ---
43
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?
 Map 2.1: James Horsburgh’s Chart of the Straits of Singapore, 1806. A copy of this map was likely used by 
Stamford Raffles and William Farquhar on their first voyage to Singapore. The numbers on the map indicate 
the depth of the water at those spots.As you learnt in Chapter 1, Singapore’s history did not begin in 1819. 
There have been traces of early Singapore’s role as a trading centre long  
before that.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 52) ---
before that.
However, by the 18th century, Singapore had little trade or economic 
activity. It would regain prominence later in the 19th century as a British 
trading post and port city.
In this chapter, you will learn why the British set up a trading post  
in Singapore and the challenges they faced in doing so. You will also learn 
about the efforts of key individuals to develop Singapore between 1819 
and 1826.CHAPTER  
2
How Did Singapore Become  
a British Trading Post?
You will learn:
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 52) ---
a British Trading Post?
You will learn:
• Why the British set up  
a trading post in Singapore 
• How the British overcame 
challenges to establish a 
trading post in Singapore 
• How key individuals 
contributed to the 
development of Singapore 
from 1819 to 1826 Chapter at a Glance
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 53) ---
44
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
 
In SingaporeFollowing the Dutch defeat 
of Johor-Riau and its Bugis 
allies in war, Johor-Riau 
signs treaties which result  
in it becoming a vassal of 
the Netherlands.
Singapore experiences little 
trade or economic activity.The British 
establish a 
trading post 
in Penang.The British East 
India Company 
(EIC) is founded.The Dutch East 
India Company 
(VOC) is founded.War breaks 
out between 
France and other
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 53) ---
out between 
France and other 
European powers.Beyond SingaporeBritain takes over Java 
from the Dutch and Sir 
Stamford Raffles becomes 
its Lieutenant-Governor.
 Sir Stamford Raffles View of the VOC's 
headquarters in Amsterdam, 
c. 1760s View of East India House, the 
headquarters of the EIC, on 
Leadenhall Street, London, 1817
1602 1789 1786 1811 1600Timeline
1784
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 54) ---
45
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?
 
The British establish a trading post 
in Singapore. Sir Stamford Raffles 
appoints Major William Farquhar  
as the first Resident of Singapore. Raffles appoints  
Dr John Crawfurd as 
the second Resident  
of Singapore.Crawfurd signs the 
Treaty of Friendship 
and Alliance with 
Sultan Hussein  
and Temenggong 
Abdul Rahman, which 
gives the British 
control over the  
whole of Singapore.Raffles visits 
Singapore for  
the final time and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 54) ---
Singapore for  
the final time and 
appoints Lieutenant 
Philip Jackson  
to draw up a plan 
for the future 
layout of Singapore.Sultan Mahmud Shah dies 
unexpectedly in the Riau Islands. His 
younger son, Tengku Abdul Rahman, 
becomes the Sultan instead of the  
heir and elder son, Tengku Hussein.The Anglo-Dutch Treaty 
of 1814 (also known as the 
Convention of London) is 
signed. The British agree 
to return Java and Melaka 
to the Dutch. 
March: Raffles becomes 
the Governor-General
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 54) ---
March: Raffles becomes 
the Governor-General 
of Bencoolen.The 1824 Anglo-Dutch 
Treaty between Britain 
and the Netherlands 
is signed. The Dutch 
formally drop their legal 
claims to the island of 
Singapore.
The EIC forms the 
Straits Settlements 
by grouping Penang, 
Melaka and Singapore 
together.November: The Dutch 
sign a treaty with  
Johor-Riau by which  
the treaties of 1784  
are renewed.
 Major William Farquhar  Dr John Crawfurd Artist’s impression of  
Tengku Abdul Rahman (left)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 54) ---
Tengku Abdul Rahman (left) 
and Tengku Hussein (right)
1819 1823 1822 1826 1824 1812 1814 1818
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 55) ---
46
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Why Did the British Become 
More Involved in Southeast Asia 
in the 19th Century?
Prior to the 19th century, most of British trade in Asia was conducted 
by the British East India Company (EIC). However, there was limited EIC 
presence in Southeast Asia. British presence in the region only grew from 
the mid-18th century onwards due to the need to protect the India-China 
trade and interest in the spice trade.
Importance of the India-China Trade
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 55) ---
Importance of the India-China Trade
By the late 18th century, much of India was under the control of the EIC. 
Trade between India and China had become the EIC’s major source of 
income. The EIC exported cotton and opium from India, as well as wool 
from Britain, to China. In return, the EIC bought tea, silk and porcelain from 
China, which were highly sought after in Britain at that time.
To protect its lucrative India-China trade, the British needed to control the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 55) ---
Straits of Melaka and the waters surrounding Singapore, which linked the 
Indian Ocean with the South China Sea (see Map 2.2). However, at the start 
of the 19th century, these were controlled by the Dutch. The EIC’s trade 
was confined to Bencoolen (present-day Bengkulu, see Map 2.3 on page 
49). Therefore, there was a need to find places in Southeast Asia that were 
free from Dutch control.
CHINA
INDIA
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 55) ---
free from Dutch control.
CHINA
INDIA
 Map 2.2: Map showing the India-China maritime trade routesINDIAN OCEAN Straits of MelakaSouth  
China Sea
Why were goods 
such as tea and opium 
important to the EIC?
Think!
Legend
Main maritime routesNThe British East India Company (EIC) 
was set up in 1600 to help British 
traders find larger markets and 
establish profitable trade with countries 
in Asia. It was given a royal charter 
to trade in India, Southeast Asia and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 55) ---
to trade in India, Southeast Asia and 
China by the British government. This 
meant that only the traders of the EIC 
could trade in these areas. Among its 
employees was Raffles. The EIC ceased 
to exist in 1858.DID YOU KNOW?
 The EIC’s coat of arms
Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 56) ---
47
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?Interest in the Spice Trade
From the 1400s onwards, spices such as cinnamon, pepper and nutmeg 
from parts of Asia were as valuable as gold in Europe. They were used for 
cooking, medicinal purposes, and were especially useful for preserving food 
as refrigeration and artificial preservatives had not yet been developed. 
Due to the high demand for spices, prices rose and the consumption of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 56) ---
spices became an indication of one’s wealth. The EIC also wanted a share 
of the flourishing spice trade in Southeast Asia. 
The European powers began competing with each other for control over  
the spice trade. Near the end of the 15th century, explorers began searching 
for new ways to reach the spice-producing regions.
Cloves
  Examples of spices sought after by the EuropeansNutmegMace
Cinnamon
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 56) ---
Cinnamon
 Fort Belgica in present-day Maluku Islands, built by the Dutch in 1611 to protect their spice tradeThe lucrative spice trade sparked European interest in the Spice Islands or Moluccas (present-day Maluku Islands) in the 16th 
century. Valuable spices such as cloves, mace and nutmeg could only be found on the Spice Islands. By 1700, the demand for spices 
in Europe had decreased while the demand for Indian textiles and cotton had grown. Spices further declined in importance in the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 56) ---
18th century with the growth of the coffee and tea trades. However, despite the relative decline in the importance of the spice trade, 
it was still lucrative to the European traders in Southeast Asia.DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 57) ---
48
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
Why Did the British Establish  
a Trading Post in Singapore?
 Hendrick Dubbels’ painting View of Batavia, c. 1650, 
with Dutch ships in the foregroundSince the 17th century, the British and the Dutch had been fierce 
competitors for trade outside Europe. Britain had already developed trade 
links with China, India and parts of Southeast Asia. However, the Dutch 
controlled a larger part of Southeast Asia as compared to the British.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 57) ---
Thus, the British had limited success establishing a trading port in Southeast 
Asia up to this time.
Problems Faced by the British EIC  
in Southeast Asia
Dutch Control of the Spice Trade
As you learnt in Chapter 1, the Dutch were already a dominant European 
power in Southeast Asia. At the height of its power, the Dutch East India 
Company (VOC) monopolised1 the trade in cloves, mace and nutmeg.
After the Dutch took over Melaka in 1641, they shifted the main trade
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 57) ---
routes to the Sunda Straits. Dutch ports such as Batavia (present-day 
Jakarta) became the key trading ports in Southeast Asia, replacing Melaka. 
By the 19th century, the Dutch were able to control trade along the Straits 
of Melaka and the Sunda Straits. Dutch control over these waterways 
meant that the British were confined to trading in Bencoolen.The Dutch East India Company, or 
Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie 
(VOC), was founded in 1602 and 
served the interests of the Dutch
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 57) ---
served the interests of the Dutch 
government overseas. It was crucial 
in helping the Dutch government 
negotiate treaties and establish colonies 
overseas. The VOC was issued a charter 
by the Dutch government that granted 
it exclusive trading rights covering the 
areas from the Indian Ocean to the 
Pacific Ocean. The VOC ceased to 
exist in 1799.DID YOU KNOW?
 The logo of the VOC
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 57) ---
exist in 1799.DID YOU KNOW?
 The logo of the VOC
1 To monopolise or have monopoly over something means that a company, person or state has complete control over it  
so that it is impossible for others to become involved in it.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 58) ---
49
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?
Penang
Melaka
Bencoolen (Bengkulu)
Batavia (Jakarta)Macassar (Makassar)AmbonTernateN
 Map 2.3: Map showing Dutch and British ports in Southeast Asia in the early 19th centuryUnsuitability of Existing British Ports
After 1786, the British had two trading ports, in Penang and Bencoolen, 
where British ships could stop for refuelling or repairs on their journeys 
between India and China. However, both were unsuitable trading ports
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 58) ---
due to their location (see Map 2.3 below).
Bencoolen was unsuitable as it was situated on the western side of Sumatra 
and not along the main trading route between India and China. 
Penang was too far north to allow the British to control the Straits of 
Melaka or protect British ships travelling through the Straits.
Straits of Melaka
Sunda Straits
Legend
Dutch ports
British ports
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 59) ---
50
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
Sir Stamford Raffles, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bencoolen, sought to increase British presence in 
Southeast Asia. He sought a port that would command the southern entrance to the Straits of Melaka. 
Such a port would help the British to compete with the Dutch for trade and could serve as the halfway 
port for traders travelling between India and China. 
The Dutch lodged official protests against
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 59) ---
The Dutch lodged official protests against 
Raffles’ initiatives, which resulted in them being 
rejected by his superiors. The British did not 
want to anger the Dutch.In September 1818, Raffles went to India and 
obtained the support of the Governor-General of 
India, Lord Hastings, to establish a British port 
in Southeast Asia. Lord Hastings recognised the 
threat the Dutch could pose to British interests  
in the region. He authorised Raffles to establish
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 59) ---
a trading post at the southern end of the Straits  
of Melaka, provided that this act would not bring 
the EIC into conflict with the Dutch.
The Dutch possess the only passes The Dutch possess the only passes 
through which ships must sail into through which ships must sail into 
the Archipelago, the Straits of the Archipelago, the Straits of 
Sunda and Melaka; and the Sunda and Melaka; and the 
British have now not an inch of British have now not an inch of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 59) ---
ground to stand upon between the ground to stand upon between the 
Cape of Good Hope and China, Cape of Good Hope and China, 
nor a single friendly port at which nor a single friendly port at which 
they can obtain water supplies.they can obtain water supplies.
Stamford RafflesStamford Raffles
14 April 181814 April 1818The BRITISH SEARCH for a NEW PORTThe BRITISH SEARCH for a NEW PORT
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 60) ---
51
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?Suitability of Singapore
Singapore possessed several qualities that made it an ideal trading port. 
First, Singapore had a natural sheltered harbour. Second, Singapore had a 
good supply of drinking water. Third, its location at the southern tip of the 
Straits of Melaka meant that Singapore could be the halfway port between 
India and China. Find out more about these qualities in the “Learn a Skill” 
feature on pages 53–55.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 60) ---
feature on pages 53–55.
Raffles and Major William Farquhar began searching for a suitable place to establish a British trading 
post. Farquhar’s preferred location, the Karimun Islands, proved unsuitable. On 28 January 1819, 
Raffles, Farquhar and their eight ships dropped anchor off St John’s Island. Raffles was greeted by 
some Orang Laut, who informed him that Singapore was not occupied by the Dutch.
However, the EIC headquarters in London had 
sent a letter to India forbidding Raffles from
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 60) ---
sent a letter to India forbidding Raffles from 
laying claim on any territory that could possibly be 
claimed by the Dutch. As the British government 
wanted to keep the Dutch as their close allies, they 
assured the Dutch that Raffles had no authority to 
undertake such political decisions. But by the time 
the letter reached India, Raffles had already set 
sail to search for a new trading post.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 61) ---
52
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)The British eventually established a trading post in Singapore. What led 
to that decision?
When historians study an event, they often look at its causes. Causes 
are the reasons for an event. They usually involve people, events or 
actions.
An event can have more than one cause. In such a case, historians 
need to examine multiple causes in order to better understand why the 
event took place. The causes may vary in their influence, with some
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 61) ---
being more important than others.
As you go through the chapter, try to identify the various reasons 
or causes that led to the establishment of a British trading post  
in Singapore.
Cause 1
Historical  
EventCause 2 Cause 3BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CAUSATION
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how historians 
understand  
causation @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc201.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 62) ---
53
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?Historians seek to understand past events or issues by examining sources and making inferences from them. 
Making inferences involves interpreting the sources and trying to understand what they can or cannot tell us 
about the past. Historians usually make inferences from a source with a specific question in mind, rather than 
in general. They also make use of what they already know (contextual knowledge) about a topic, event or
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 62) ---
issue, to help them interpret the source.
Look at the steps below on how to make an inference.
Let us see how this works using the example on the next page.
Contextual  
Knowledge
Source  
Details
Inference1
Identify the keywords in the question.Step
2
Identify the source details (information from the source) that 
answer the question.Step
3Use the source details and what you might already know 
about the issue (contextual knowledge) to arrive at a
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 62) ---
conclusion.StepLEARN A SKILL: MAKING INFERENCES
LEARN ON THE GO
Sharpen your  
inference skills @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc202 .
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 63) ---
54
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Example
Singapore seemed ideal. While the southwestern bank of the river was swampy, the ground on the northeastern side 
was level and firm. There was an abundance of drinking water, and the river mouth formed a natural sheltered harbour. 
Singapore was conveniently placed as a centre for trade with the eastern archipelago and only a few miles from the main 
maritime route through the Straits of Melaka to China.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 63) ---
– Adapted from A History of Modern Singapore, 1819–2005 by British historian Constance Mary Turnbull
Singapore seemed ideal. While the southwestern bank of the river was swampy, the ground on the northeastern side 
was level and firm. There was an abundance of drinking water , and the river mouth formed a natural sheltered harbour .  
Singapore was conveniently placed as a centre for trade with the eastern archipelago and only a few miles from the main
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 63) ---
maritime route through the Straits of Melaka to China.
– Adapted from A History of Modern Singapore, 1819–2005 by British historian Constance Mary Turnbull
What does Source 1 tell you about why the British chose Singapore as a port? SOURCE 1
1. What does Source 1 tell you about why the British chose Singapore as a port?
Identify the relevant source details 2Reasons for choosing Singapore
Reason 1
Reason 3Reason 2Identify the keywords in the question1
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 64) ---
55
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?Use the source details and your contextual knowledge to draw conclusions3
Now try it yourself!
I am fully satisfied of the value and importance of the Island of Singapore. There is a most excellent harbour which is even 
more defensible and conveniently located for the protection of our China Trade and for controlling the Straits of Melaka,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 64) ---
as compared to Riau. Moreover, it has been deserted for centuries and long before the Dutch power existed in these Seas.
– Adapted from a letter written by Raffles to Lord Hastings, 8 January 1819SOURCE 2
1. Source 1 identified three reasons why the British chose Singapore as a port. According to Source 2, what was another 
reason that the British had for choosing Singapore as a port? Use the table below to help you.Source Details
Source DetailsContextual Knowledge
Contextual KnowledgeInference
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 64) ---
Contextual KnowledgeInference
Inference“abundance of drinking water”Ships need to replenish their water 
supply during long journeys.Ships travelling from other parts of  
the world, e.g., India, could replenish 
their water supply in Singapore during 
their stopover on the way to China.
“formed a natural sheltered harbour”The region that Singapore was  
located in experienced monsoons 
during certain times of the year.Singapore’s harbour could protect 
British ships from storms.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 64) ---
British ships from storms.
“conveniently placed as  
a centre for trade”The India-China trade was  
the EIC’s main source of income  
by the late 18th century.Singapore’s suitable location meant 
that traders from all over the world 
could come to Singapore to trade. 
Singapore could also serve as a 
stopover for ships on the way to  
China. This would enable the British  
to increase their trade with China.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 65) ---
56
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)How Did the British Establish  
a Trading Post in Singapore?
As you have seen in Sources 1 and 2 (pages 54 and 55), Singapore 
possessed several qualities that made it an ideal port. However,  
establishing a trading post on the island was not an easy task for the British. 
They faced a number of obstacles in doing so. 
On 29 January 1819, Raffles and Farquhar met the local chief, Temenggong
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 65) ---
Abdul Rahman. Raffles informed the Temenggong that the EIC wanted to 
set up a trading post in Singapore.
The Temenggong replied that he did not have the authority to grant 
permission to the EIC. As Singapore was part of Johor-Riau at that time, 
only the Sultan of Johor-Riau could do so. However, Johor-Riau was a vassal 
of the Dutch as a result of the Treaties of 1784 and 1818.
Raffles knew that he had to find a solution. An opportunity arose after the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 65) ---
Temenggong told him what had happened after the death of the previous 
Sultan. Read the following illustrated story to find out more.
The late Sultan Mahmud Shah, ruler of Johor-Riau, 
had two sons: Tengku Abdul Rahman, the younger 
son, and Tengku Hussein, the elder son and heir. When Sultan Mahmud passed away in 1812, 
only Tengku Abdul Rahman was present. Tengku 
Hussein was away in Pahang for his marriage. 
The Bugis chiefs, who had considerable influence
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 65) ---
The Bugis chiefs, who had considerable influence 
in Johor-Riau, appointed Tengku Abdul Rahman 
as the new Sultan in Tengku Hussein’s absence.The SUCCESSION DISPUTEThe SUCCESSION DISPUTE
and RAFFLES’ ACTIONSand RAFFLES’ ACTIONSLEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
the establishment of 
a British trading post 
in Singapore @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc203.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 66) ---
57
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?
Those who supported Tengku Hussein, including 
the widow of the late Sultan Mahmud Shah, were 
unhappy, but they were powerless to do anything. 
Without a strong ally, Tengku Hussein decided to 
live quietly in Riau.Raffles learnt about this and invited Tengku Hussein 
to Singapore, promising him protection and financial 
assistance. With the Temenggong’s help, Raffles 
secretly brought Tengku Hussein back to Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 66) ---
Tengku Hussein probably saw Raffles’ invitation to 
come to Singapore as an opportunity to counter 
Dutch support for the Bugis and Sultan Abdul Rahman. 
Support from the British would likely increase his 
power in the region.
On 6 February 1819, Raffles recognised Tengku Hussein as the 
rightful Sultan. He signed an agreement with Sultan Hussein and the 
Temenggong which allowed the British to build a trading post in the 
southern part of Singapore island. In return, the Temenggong and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 66) ---
Sultan Hussein would receive an annual payment as compensation. 
The British also agreed to give protection and support to the Sultan 
and Temenggong if they agreed not to make any treaties with other 
Western powers. After signing the treaty, Raffles made Farquhar the 
first Resident * of Singapore and left for Penang the next day.
* The title of Resident is given to the British officer in charge of a British settlement.
How would Raffles’ 
actions have been 
viewed by the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 66) ---
actions have been 
viewed by the  
different parties?Think!
 Pages of the 1819 Treaty between Sir Stamford Raffles, 
Sultan Hussein and Temenggong Abdul Rahman
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 67) ---
58
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Dutch and British Responses
The Dutch were angry when they heard the British had established a 
trading post in Singapore. They contested Raffles’ actions, claiming that 
Singapore belonged to them since it was part of Johor-Riau, which was 
under the Dutch area of influence.
Initially, the British government in London was also angry with Raffles 
as his actions threatened its friendship with the Dutch. Lord Hastings,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 67) ---
however, was convinced of the need for a British trading post in Singapore 
to prevent Dutch advancement in the region around the Straits of 
Melaka and the Sunda Straits. Over the next few years, British traders in  
Southeast Asia also became convinced of the need to retain Singapore for 
the protection and expansion of British trade in the East.
The dispute was only settled several years later.
How Did the British Resolve  
the Dispute over Singapore?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 67) ---
the Dispute over Singapore?
Despite the hostility between the Dutch and the British over 
the question of Singapore, neither declared war on the other. 
Both governments wanted to remain on friendly terms.
During recent European wars which took place between 1789 
and 1815, the British became aware of the importance of the 
Netherlands to their defence and security. It was therefore 
important for the British to keep the Dutch as an ally against 
future threats.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 67) ---
future threats.
For the Dutch, the wars in Europe had severely disrupted 
their trade and shipping. They had become bankrupt and had 
borrowed heavily from Britain. The Dutch therefore did not 
want to be involved in more wars as this would further harm 
their economy.
1824 Anglo-Dutch Treaty
With all these considerations in mind, the British and the Dutch 
agreed to settle their disputes. On 17 March 1824, they signed 
the 1824 Anglo-Dutch Treaty, in which the Dutch withdrew
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 67) ---
their objections to British presence in Singapore. Detail from Article 12 of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty,  
17 March 1824, which states that the Netherlands 
“withdraws the objections which have been made 
to the occupation of the island of Singapore …” 
and the British were excluded from “any of the 
other islands south of the Singapore Straits”  
(lines highlighted in yellow)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 68) ---
59
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?To India 
and Ceylon
As a result of the treaty, the Malay Peninsula and the East Indies (present-
day Indonesia) were divided into two spheres of influence2 (see Map 2.5). 
The British transferred Bencoolen to the Dutch in exchange for Melaka. 
The British now occupied Penang, Melaka and Singapore. According to the 
treaty, the Malay Peninsula and Singapore came within the British sphere
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 68) ---
of influence while Sumatra and all islands to the south of the Straits of 
Singapore were under the Dutch sphere of influence. The Dutch had 
control of the trade within their sphere of influence but not beyond. Map 2.5: Map showing Dutch and British bases after the signing of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty Map 2.4: This map, printed in the early 19th century,  
was used at the time of the final negotiations of the  
Anglo-Dutch Treaty in London between December 1823
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 68) ---
and March 1824. Notice the pencil line (indicated by the 
blue arrow) running through the Singapore and Melaka 
Straits on the map. This was drawn to illustrate a proposal 
made by Anton Reinhard Falck, a Dutch diplomat and  
chief negotiator of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty. He proposed 
using the line to divide the region into British and Dutch 
spheres of influence.
Penang
Bencoolen
BataviaJavaBorneoMoluccasMelaka
Singapore
Sumatra
N
Singapore
SumatraSouth 
China Sea
Legend
Dutch ports
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 68) ---
SumatraSouth 
China Sea
Legend
Dutch ports
British ports
Line demarcating British 
and Dutch spheres of 
interest and influenceStraits of Melaka
Straits of 
Singapore
BRITISH SPHERE 
OF INFLUENCE
DUTCH SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
2 A sphere of influence is an area or region over which a country is acknowledged by others to exercise dominance or control.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 69) ---
60
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
1824 Treaty of Friendship and Alliance
The treaty that was signed on 6 February 1819 did not give the British 
control of Singapore. The treaty merely gave the British permission 
to build a trading post in the southern part of Singapore island. 
Singapore only officially came under British control on 2 August 
1824 when Dr John Crawfurd, the second Resident of Singapore, 
signed a treaty with Sultan Hussein that allowed the British to take
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 69) ---
control over the whole island of Singapore. The Sultan and the 
Temenggong handed over control of Singapore island to the EIC 
in return for larger sums of money than they had previously been 
entitled to.
Treaty Who Signed It?What Was the Outcome  
of the Treaty?
 1819 Treaty Sir Stamford Raffles
 Sultan Hussein
 Temenggong Abdul Rahman The British were allowed to set up  
a trading post in the southern part  
of Singapore island.
 1824 Anglo-Dutch 
Treaty Representatives of the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 69) ---
1824 Anglo-Dutch 
Treaty Representatives of the 
British government
 Representatives of the 
Dutch government The Dutch dropped their legal 
claims over Singapore. 
 The areas in the Malay Peninsula 
and East Indies were divided 
into British and Dutch spheres of 
influence. 
 1824 Treaty of 
Friendship and 
Alliance Dr John Crawfurd
 Sultan Hussein
 Temenggong Abdul Rahman The British were given control over 
the whole of Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 69) ---
the whole of Singapore.
 Page from a copy of the 1824 Treaty of Friendship and AllianceArticle 2 of the 1824 Treaty of Friendship and Alliance states as follows:
Their Highnesses the Sultan Hussein Mahomed Shah [also 
known as Sultan Hussein], and Datu Tamungong Abdul 
Rahman Sri Maharajah [also known as Temenggong Abdul 
Rahman], hereby cede in full sovereignty and property to 
the Honourable the English East India Company, their heirs
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 69) ---
and successors for ever, the Island of Singapore situated in 
the Straits of Malacca, together with the adjacent Seas, 
Straits and Islets, to the extent of ten geographical miles 
from the coast of the said main Island of Singapore.
 Figure 2.1: Treaties that impacted Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 70) ---
61
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?What Did the British Do 
to Develop Singapore as 
a Settlement Between 
1819 and 1826?
Although Raffles was the one who signed the 1819 Treaty 
that allowed the British to establish a trading post in 
Singapore, he was not the only person involved in its 
development. In fact, he left for Penang the day after 
signing the treaty.
Let us look at the efforts of some individuals who helped 
to develop the settlement.
Major William Farquhar
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 70) ---
to develop the settlement.
Major William Farquhar
Before leaving Singapore, Raffles appointed Major  
William Farquhar as the first Resident of Singapore and 
left him with instructions on what to do.
For a start, Farquhar set up defence positions at the 
Singapore River and Government Hill (present-day Fort 
Canning) with the help of 100 sepoys (Indian soldiers). This 
was due to the fear of a Dutch attack to enforce their 
claims over Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 70) ---
claims over Singapore.
The British decided to make Singapore a free port. This 
meant that fees were not collected from ships entering 
the port; taxes were only imposed on selected products, 
such as opium. Farquhar placed a British official on  
St John’s Island (located to the south of the main island 
of Singapore) to inform passing ships about the new 
settlement and its free port. Many traders came, and 
Singapore soon grew into a bustling marketplace.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 70) ---
Singapore soon grew into a bustling marketplace.
By 1823, Farquhar had attracted many people, including 
traders and labourers, from Melaka to Singapore. Traders 
from Melaka helped solve Singapore’s food shortage issues, 
which were brought about by the increasing population. 
To raise funds to ensure the smooth running of Singapore, 
Farquhar went against Raffles’ orders and sold licences for 
gambling and the sale of opium and liquor. Using the funds
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 70) ---
generated from the sale of these licences, Farquhar set up a 
police force. Major William Farquhar
Farquhar was so popular with the people of Singapore that 
when he left in 1823, thousands turned up to send him off.
They brought him gifts, including the silver epergne 
(ornamental table centrepiece) below from the Chinese 
community. 
Today, there is no road or place in Singapore that bears 
Farquhar’s name. Farquhar Street in Kampong Glam
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 70) ---
was the only road named after him, but it is no longer  
in existence.
Farquhar was an avid collector of the drawings of wildlife 
and flora native to the Malay Peninsula. Farquhar Garden, 
part of the newly restored Fort Canning Park, was officially 
opened on 27 May 2019. This garden features plants which 
fascinated Farquhar, such as gambier and guava.DID YOU KNOW?
 Silver epergne given to Farquhar by the Chinese in Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 71) ---
62
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Raffles had a keen interest in natural history. During his time in 
Southeast Asia, he collected specimens of plants and animals.  
The Rafflesia  plant and Dinopium rafflesii  (olive-backed 
woodpecker) are some of the plants and animals named  
after him.
On his last visit to Singapore, Raffles set up a botanical and 
experimental garden around Government Hill to cultivate cash 
crops such as cloves and nutmeg. Cash crops are crops grown for
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 71) ---
selling rather than for self-consumption.DID YOU KNOW?
Sir Stamford Raffles
From 1818 to 1824, Raffles was based in Bencoolen, Sumatra. 
During this period, he only visited Singapore three times.
In October 1822, Raffles made his third and final visit to 
Singapore and remained until June 1823. It was during this 
visit that he realised Farquhar had not developed the 
island in the way he wanted. He became unhappy with 
Farquhar and dismissed him. With the help of Lieutenant
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 71) ---
Philip Jackson, Raffles designed the Singapore Town Plan. 
This Plan allocated areas to the respective ethnic groups 
in an orderly manner (see Map 2.6).
Raffles also shut down gambling dens, which had been 
a source of income during Farquhar’s term as Resident. 
Raffles felt that gambling was harmful to the population, 
and had banned it when he was in charge of Bencoolen 
from 1817 to 1822. Sir Stamford Raffles
 Illustration of the first botanical and experimental garden in Singapore, 1840
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 71) ---
Fishing Village
Commercial Square
 Commercial Square, with John Little & Co’s 
department store on the left, c. 1910
Commercial Square, on the south bank of 
the Singapore River, was designated as 
an area for conducting trading activities.
Chinatown Hokkien Street, 1890s
Chinatown was allocated to the Chinese 
community. It was separated into different 
areas for the different dialect groups.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 72) ---
Singapore Town Plan, 1822Botanical and Experimental Garden
Beach Road
Arab StreetNorth Bridge RoadNorth Bridge RoadSouth Bridge RoadChurch Street
China Street
Battery 
PointPier JettyTelok Ayer  Street
High StreetCantonment Plain Selegy StreetHill StreetSeligi Hill
HospitalBazarNative Cantonment
Rocher 
SquareOpen Square
European TownChulia KampongChinatown
Commercial 
SquareSingapore River
Civic District
Kampong 
Glam
 Map 2.6: The layout of Singapore according to the Singapore Town Plan
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 72) ---
by Lieutenant Philip Jackson in 1822
European Town
 Bras Basah Road, c. 1905European Town was set aside for the 
European trading community.
Civic District
 The Padang (labelled Open Square on the map), 
with the Singapore Cricket Club (left) and Municipal 
Building (right) in the background, 1900s
The Civic District was reserved for 
government use. Individuals were not 
allowed to construct their houses here.
Chulia Kampong Chulia Street, with Bonham Building on the right,  
c. 1900
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 72) ---
c. 1900
Chulia Kampong was allocated to the 
Indian trading community.
Kampong Glam
 Sultan Mosque, located at the corner of  
Arab Street and North Bridge Road, c. 1930Kampong Glam was assigned to the 
Malays, Bugis and Arabs. Sultan Hussein 
also resided in this area.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 73) ---
64
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Dr John Crawfurd
Dr John Crawfurd was appointed by Raffles as the second Resident of 
Singapore during his final visit to Singapore.
After Raffles left Singapore in August 1823, Crawfurd reintroduced licences 
for public gambling and the sale of opium. The profits earned were used 
to ensure the smooth running of Singapore. Crawfurd also maintained 
the policy of free trade in Singapore, in accordance with Raffles’ wishes.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 73) ---
Singapore’s first newspaper and street lighting were also introduced when 
Crawfurd was Resident.
Crawfurd played an important role in the signing of the 1824 Treaty of 
Friendship and Alliance, in which Sultan Hussein and the Temenggong 
handed over control of Singapore to the EIC. With the signing of this 
treaty, Singapore officially came under British control. Dr John Crawfurd
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 73) ---
Illustration inside John Crawfurd’s book Journal of an Embassy from the Governor-General of India to the Courts of Siam and Cochin China, published in 1828, 
showing a black-and-white version of the painting titled A View of the Town and Roads of Singapore from the Government Hill by Captain Robert James Elliot
Conclusion 
The British established a trading post in Singapore in 1819 after a long 
period when there was little trade or economic activity in Singapore. In
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 73) ---
doing so, the British had to overcome challenges posed mainly by Dutch 
dominance in the region. The uncertainty over the status of Singapore led 
to claims by both the British and the Dutch. This was only resolved with 
the signing of the 1824 Anglo-Dutch Treaty. The British were then able to 
focus on developing Singapore as a trading port.
In 1826, the EIC grouped Singapore together with Penang and Melaka to 
form the Straits Settlements. What was the impact of this on Singapore?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 73) ---
Did the free port of Singapore take off after 1826? You will learn about this 
in Chapter 3.Crawfurd followed in his father’s 
footsteps and studied medicine at the 
University of Edinburgh in Scotland. 
With an interest in languages and history, 
he also studied the Malay and Javanese 
languages during his time in Southeast 
Asia. After leaving Singapore in 1826, he 
was sent on a mission to Burma (present-
day Myanmar) in 1826 before returning 
to the United Kingdom in 1830.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 73) ---
to the United Kingdom in 1830.
Crawfurd made several unsuccessful 
attempts to enter the British Parliament 
in the 1830s. In 1868 (the last year of 
his life), he became the first President 
of the Straits Settlements Association, 
which was established to protect 
British interests in the region. 
Crawford Street, Crawford Lane, 
Crawford Bridge and Crawford Park 
are named after him, although his 
surname is spelt differently.DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 74) ---
65
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?
Use the flow chart below to summarise what you have learnt in this chapter. Each question in the flow chart 
points you to the corresponding section in the chapter.
Why did the British 
become more involved 
in Southeast Asia  
in the 19th century?
 
Why did the British 
establish a trading post 
in Singapore?
How did the British 
resolve the dispute 
over Singapore?How did the British 
establish a trading post 
in Singapore?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 74) ---
establish a trading post 
in Singapore?
What did the British do 
to develop Singapore 
as a settlement 
between 1819  
and 1826?LET’S REVIEW
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 75) ---
66
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Today, Raffles’ name can be seen all over Singapore: Raffles Place MRT station and Raffles Boulevard, just 
to give a few examples. This is because Raffles is often recognised as the founder of Singapore. However, 
not everyone takes this view.
Given what you have learnt about the contributions of Raffles, Farquhar and Crawfurd to the development 
of Singapore, who do you think founded Singapore? Before answering this question, think about what it
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 75) ---
means to be a founder. What does it mean to found a place?
Some maintain that Raffles was the founder as he signed the 1819 Treaty that allowed the British to 
set up a trading post in the southern part of Singapore. Others argue that Farquhar was the founder of 
Singapore as he did the work of building Singapore from scratch. Some may even consider Crawfurd the 
founder as he signed the 1824 Treaty of Friendship and Alliance that gave the British control over the  
whole island.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 75) ---
whole island.
Read the sources that follow and conduct your own investigation into who founded Singapore.Who founded Singapore?CASE INVESTIGATION
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 76) ---
67
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?
The inscription on a statue of Sir Stamford Raffles (left) in London:
To the memory of 
Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, L.L.D. F.R.S. 
Lieut. Governor of Java 
and first President of the Zoological Society of London. 
Born 1781 Died 1826.
Selected at an early age to conduct the government 
of the British conquests in the Indian Ocean, 
by wisdom, vigour,* and philanthropy,†  
he raised Java to happiness and prosperity
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 76) ---
he raised Java to happiness and prosperity 
unknown under former rulers. 
After the surrender of that island to the Dutch, 
and during his government in Sumatra 
he founded an emporium at Singapore, 
where in establishing freedom of person as the right of the soil,  
and freedom of trade as the right of the port, 
he secured to the British flag 
the maritime superiority of the eastern seas. 
Ardently§ attached to science, 
he laboured successfully to add to the knowledge
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 76) ---
he laboured successfully to add to the knowledge 
and enrich the museums of his native land, 
in promoting the welfare of the people committed to his charge,  
he sought the good of his country, 
and the glory of God.SOURCE A
The progress of my new settlement is in every way most satisfactory, and it would gladden your heart to witness the 
activity and cheerfulness which prevails throughout. Every day brings us new settlers, and Singapore has already become
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 76) ---
a great emporium. Houses and warehouses are springing up in every direction.
– From a letter by Stamford Raffles to his cousin, Reverend Dr Thomas Raffles, written in 1823SOURCE B
* Vigour refers to energy and enthusiasm.
† Philanthropy is the donation of money to support good causes  
or charity, e.g., the building of schools, hospitals and museums.
§ Ardently means very enthusiastically.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 77) ---
68
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)
The inscription on the memorial to William Farquhar (left)  
in Perth, Scotland:
Sacred  
to the memory  
of 
Major General William Farquhar  
of the H.E.I.C. * Service  
and Madras Engineer Corps  
who served in the East Indies  
upwards of 33 years.  
During 20 years of his valuable life  
he was appointed to offices  
of high responsibility  
under the civil government of India  
having in addition to his military duties
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 77) ---
having in addition to his military duties 
served as Resident in Malacca  
and afterwards at Singapore  
which later settlement he founded.  
In all the stations† which he filled  
he acquired honour to himself  
and rendered‡ service to his country. 
He departed this life at Early Bank, Perth,  
on the 11th of May 1839, 
highly respected and deeply regretted  
by all who had the happiness 
of his acquaintance.SOURCE D
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 77) ---
of his acquaintance.SOURCE D
Farquhar, the first and only official to hold the dual posts of Resident and commandant in Singapore, deserves much more 
credit in the founding of Singapore than he is popularly given. He had initiated the search for a new post and negotiated 
the commercial treaty with Riau that laid the groundwork for Hastings’ instructions to Raffles to establish a new post.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 77) ---
... Farquhar built up Singapore’s trade and population to such an extent that Britain’s initial disinterest in Singapore 
changed to a determination to retain it. While Raffles had higher responsibility for Singapore, it was Farquhar who, 
against the odds, had built the settlement from scratch into a successful port.
– Adapted from a description by Australian writer Nadia Wright of William Farquhar’s  
contributions to the development of Singapore, published in 2017SOURCE C
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 77) ---
* H.E.I.C. refers to the Honourable East India Company.
† Stations refer to positions.
‡ To render is to provide.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 78) ---
69
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?
Crawfurd cannot be considered a founder or co-founder of the colonial settlement. It was Raffles and Farquhar who laid 
the foundations in January–February 1819, and could at least lay claim to this distinction, as reflected in the inscription 
on the base of Raffles’ statue in Westminster Abbey, London, and that on Farquhar’s grave in Perth, Scotland.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 78) ---
Yet, it was Crawfurd who actually signed the final treaty which brought Singapore under British control, and deserves to 
be remembered and commemorated for this achievement. Sadly, he is the least remembered of the three, though there 
are a few traces in Singapore.
– Adapted from a description by Singaporean historian Ernest Chew  
of John Crawfurd’s contributions to Singapore, 2002SOURCE E
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 78) ---
In some ways, history has been unfair to Farquhar and Crawfurd, who gave early Singapore the efficient administration* 
that Raffles could not supply. The actual implementation of Raffles’ policies fell to Crawfurd. Raffles drew broad sweeping 
outlines, and it was left to practical and realistic men like Farquhar and Crawfurd to fill in the details.
– Adapted from a description by British historian Constance Mary Turnbull
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 78) ---
of the contributions of Raffles, Farquhar and Crawfurd, published in 2009
* Administration refers to the work involved in running a government, place or company.SOURCE F
1. Read Sources A and B. What were Stamford Raffles’ contributions to the development of Singapore?
2. Read Sources C and D. What were William Farquhar’s contributions to the development of Singapore?
3. Read Sources E and F. What were John Crawfurd’s contributions to the development of Singapore?INVESTIGATE!
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 79) ---
70
FROM TEMASEK TO SINGAPORE (1299–EARLY 1800 S)Now that you have read the sources, list the ways in which Raffles, Farquhar and Crawfurd contributed 
to the development of Singapore. Use the sources and what you have read in the chapter as evidence to 
support your ideas. If you wish, you can present your findings in a table like the one below.
IndividualContributions to the  
Development of SingaporeEvidence
Stamford Raffles
William Farquhar
John CrawfurdREPORT!
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 80) ---
71
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME A BRITISH TRADING POST?Given your findings, who do you think founded Singapore? Create an inscription for a plinth, which is a 
base supporting a statue, for that person. A sentence starter has been provided below to help you in creating 
the inscription for the person who you think founded Singapore.
Who founded Singapore?
 Statue
 Plinth
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 81) ---
2
In this unit, we will study the changes in Singapore under British rule. We will also learn about the 
experiences of the various groups of people living in Singapore, the challenges they faced and 
their contributions up to the fall of Singapore in 1942.
The pictures on these two pages show different people and street scenes in colonial Singapore. 
From these pictures, how do you think these people contributed to Singapore’s development as
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 81) ---
a port city under the British? Singapore’s Development as a Port City  
Under the British (1819–1942)UNIT
 OVERVIEW
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 84) ---
Painting by Robert Wilson Wiber of Singapore’s 
busy harbour, with Fort Canning Hill in the 
background, 1849
75
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?When the British first arrived in 1819, there was uncertainty over Singapore's 
status as a British trading post. The status of Singapore was established 
when it came under British rule after the signing of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 84) ---
and the Treaty of Friendship and Alliance in 1824. Singapore was declared a 
free port from its founding days and soon became the centre for regional 
trade. Many people flocked to the island to enjoy the benefits of free  
trade.1 By the eve of the Japanese invasion in 1942, Singapore had become 
a very prosperous and important port city.2
What were the reasons for Singapore’s growth? In this chapter, we will look
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 84) ---
at the role of the British in developing Singapore as a port city. We will also 
look at the impact of external developments, such as the opening of the 
Suez Canal and the Great Depression, on Singapore’s growth.CHAPTER  
3
How Did British Rule and External 
Developments Affect Singapore’s Growth  
as a Port City from 1819 to 1942?
You will learn:
• How British rule helped 
Singapore develop into  
a port city
• How external developments 
impacted Singapore’s growth
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 84) ---
impacted Singapore’s growth 
as a port cityChapter at a Glance
1 When free trade is conducted in a country, goods and services can be bought and sold without government taxes or restrictions.
2 A port city usually serves as the main connecting link between regions for trading purposes. Most of the people in a port city 
depend on the port for their jobs and incomes.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 85) ---
Beyond Singapore
The East India Company (EIC) 
forms the Straits Settlements 
by grouping Penang, Melaka 
and Singapore together.The EIC loses dominant 
control over the China trade.
Singapore replaces 
Penang as the capital of 
the Straits Settlements.
The New Harbour (later 
renamed Keppel Harbour) 
at Tanjong Pagar is opened.Thomas Dunman is appointed 
as the first full-time 
Commissioner of Police.In Singapore
 Opening of the third dock 
at the New Harbour, 1869 Artist's impression
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 85) ---
at the New Harbour, 1869 Artist's impression 
of Thomas DunmanTimeline
 View of East India House, the 
headquarters of the EIC, on 
Leadenhall Street, London, 1817
1826 1852 1833 1857 1832
76
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 86) ---
The EIC is dissolved. 
The territories under 
its rule come under  
the direct control of 
the British government.The administration of 
the Straits Settlements 
is transferred to the 
Colonial Office  
in London.The British 
start to expand 
their presence 
in Malaya by 
signing the  
Pangkor Treaty.
Singapore benefits 
as more products 
from Malaya are 
exported to other 
countries from its 
port.The Quarantine Law 
is passed. Singapore, together with 
Penang and Melaka, is
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 86) ---
Penang and Melaka, is 
transferred to the British 
government after the 
EIC is dissolved. The 
India Office in London 
administers these 
territories.The Chinese Protectorate is 
set up with William Pickering 
as the first Protector of the 
Chinese.The Suez Canal is opened.
 Opening of the Suez Canal, 
17 November 1869
 William Pickering  Migrants at the quarantine station 
at St John’s Island, c. 19301869 1867 1874 1877 1886 1858
77
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 86) ---
77
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 87) ---
The development of the motor car industry  
in the United States fuels the demand for rubber.
The Public 
Health 
Department 
is set up.
The Straits Trading Company 
is formed, playing a key role in 
smelting tin ore from Malaya.Henry “Mad” Ridley, director of 
the Singapore Botanic Gardens, 
finds a way to tap rubber sap 
without damaging the tree.Singapore becomes  
a major processor  
and exporter of rubber.
The Dangerous Societies 
Ordinance, which bans 
secret societies, comes
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 87) ---
Ordinance, which bans 
secret societies, comes 
into force.New roads and railways link Malaya 
to Singapore, facilitating the 
transport of tin ore and rubber 
to Singapore for processing and 
export.
 1909–1910 Model T by Ford Motor 
Company, one of the biggest automakers 
in the US in the early 1900s
 The first tin smelter  
on Pulau Brani Secret society members, 1900s  Henry Ridley1897 1896 1887 1900s 1890Beyond Singapore In SingaporeTimeline
78
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 87) ---
78
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 88) ---
World War I Wall Street Crash in the United States;  
start of the Great Depression
The Johor-Singapore 
Causeway is opened.Rubber prices plunge to an all-time 
low, causing many rubber companies 
in Singapore to go bankrupt.Japanese troops 
invade Singapore.
 Impoverished family 
in the US, 1936
 The Causeway enables the 
rise of motor transportation 
between Singapore and Malaya. British troops surrendering 
to the Japanese1931 1914–1918 1942 1924 1929 British soldiers, wearing anti-gas
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 88) ---
helmets, operating a machine gun  
during a battle in World War I
79
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 89) ---
How Did the British Help Develop 
Singapore into a Port City?
The British played an important role in Singapore’s development. Let us 
look at six areas in which the British contributed to make Singapore a port 
city with extensive trading networks to all parts of the world. As you read 
this section, think about the areas in which the British made the most 
contributions.
FREE PORT STATUS
FACILITIES
HEALTHCARE EDUCATIONLAW AND 
ORDERADMINISTRATIVE 
CHANGES
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 89) ---
ORDERADMINISTRATIVE 
CHANGES
 Figure 3.1: British contributions to Singapore’s development as a port cityTax
80
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 90) ---
10
02030
1824 1833 1843 1853 1863 1873405060708090Amount of trade ($ million)
 Figure 3.2: Bar graph showing the growth in Singapore’s trade from 1824 to 1873Free Port Status
A key factor attracting traders to Singapore was its free port status, which 
the British put in place in 1819. Traders came in ships from different places 
and could trade freely with one another in Singapore. They were not 
required to pay taxes on the goods they carried.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 90) ---
required to pay taxes on the goods they carried.
Much of Singapore’s trade in the 19th century involved transshipment and 
entrepôt trade. Transshipment refers to the transfer of goods from one 
trading ship to another while in transit at the port. The repackaging and 
redistribution of imported manufactured goods and regional produce is 
known as entrepôt trade. Profits were made by processing and packaging 
goods before they were re-exported elsewhere. Study the illustrated story
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 90) ---
on the next two pages to find out more about Singapore’s entrepôt trade.
What were the reasons for transshipment and entrepôt trade? Why were 
the goods not sent directly by the producers to the consumers? This was 
because Singapore provided an easily accessible, tax-free and centrally 
located place for both Western and Asian goods to be collected and 
exchanged. 
As a result, Singapore flourished as a port city. Between 1830 and 1867,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 90) ---
its trade almost tripled. By the time Singapore was handed over to the 
Colonial Office in 1867, it was already one of the most important and 
prosperous ports in the British Empire.
$89.7m
$55.5m
$28.9m
$24.6m
$16.7m
$11.6m
Year
81
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 91) ---
INDIABRITAIN & WESTERN EUROPE
CHINA
SIAM, ANNAM & 
COCHIN CHINA*
MALAY ARCHIPELAGO†Cotton, 
opiumManufactured products (e.g., glassware, clocks)
Tea, silk
Rice, sugar, salt
Coffee, pepper, birds’ nestsGoods from different parts of the world 
were brought in bulk to Singapore.
Goods were unloaded from 
ships into warehouses.SINGAPORELegend
Maritime route
Overland route
* The terms “Annam” and “Cochin China” were used to describe parts of present-day Vietnam 
during the colonial period.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 91) ---
during the colonial period.
† The term “Malay Archipelago” was first used in the 19th century to refer to the groups of 
islands that include modern-day Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Brunei and Singapore.ENTREPÔT TRADE inENTREPÔT TRADE in
19th-century Singapore19th-century Singapore
82
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 92) ---
The goods were repackaged 
into smaller quantities.
SINGAPORE
 Tea
 Cotton textiles
 Glassware
 SpicesRepackaging  
of goods in 
Singapore to  
be re-exported 
elsewhereEUROPE CHINA
INDIA MALAY ARCHIPELAGOThe repackaged goods were exported to places 
such as Europe, India, China and the Malay 
Archipelago. This importing and re-exporting of 
the same goods is known as entrepôt trade.
Legend
Imports to Singapore
Exports from Singapore
83
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 92) ---
Imports to Singapore
Exports from Singapore
83
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 93) ---
Statistical data can be represented in different ways, such as charts, tables or graphs. A chart, table or graph 
tells a story and allows people studying it to extract relevant information and draw conclusions about a topic. 
The following are some useful tips for analysing a chart, table or graph: 
• Look at the title of the chart, table or graph.
• Examine the column headers (for tables) or legend (for charts and graphs) to find out what the data 
represents.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 93) ---
represents.
• Survey the dates and note the time interval.
• Look for trends or patterns of change.
• Scan the data to find out whether the numbers are moving upwards or downwards.
• Note the level of the increases or decreases.
• Use your historical knowledge to explain the changes.
Study Figure 3.3 below and Figure 3.4 on the next page. Both show Singapore’s trade in terms of imports and 
exports between 1824 and 1938, represented in the form of a table and a graph respectively.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 93) ---
– Adapted from data compiled by Wong Lin Ken,  
an economic historian focusing on the trade of Singapore, published in 1991Year Imports ($ million) Exports ($ million) Total ($ million)
1824 6.6 5.0 11.6
1833 9.1 7.6 16.7
1843 13.1 11.5 24.6
1853 15.5 13.4 28.9
1863 29.8 25.7 55.5
1873 47.9 41.8 89.7
1883 79.2 68.2 147.4
1893 124.0 108.5 232.5
1903 299.3 257.7 557.0
1913 349.7 272.4 622.1
1923 573.0 402.7 975.7
1933 261.7 251.1 512.8
1938 369.6 320.3 689.9
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 93) ---
1933 261.7 251.1 512.8
1938 369.6 320.3 689.9
 Figure 3.3: Table showing the value of goods traded in Singapore between 1824 and 1938LEARN A SKILL: INTERPRETING STATISTICAL DATA
84
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 94) ---
1. What trends do you observe in the total trade of Singapore from 1824 
to 1938?
2. Explain the trends in Singapore’s imports and exports from 1824 to 
1938.
3. Is the table or the graph a better way to represent the data on 
Singapore’s trade? Why do you think so?
– Adapted from data compiled by Wong Lin Ken, 
an economic historian focusing on the trade of Singapore, published in 19910100200
1824 1833 1843 1853 1863 1873 1883 1893 1903 1913 1923 1933 1938300400500600700800
Total trade
Imports
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 94) ---
Total trade
Imports
Exports9001,000Amount of trade ($ million)
Year
Legend
 Figure 3.4: Graph showing the value of goods traded in Singapore between 1824 and 1938Total trade Imports ExportsLEARN ON THE GO
Sharpen your skills  
in interpreting  
statistics in history @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc301.
85
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 95) ---
Administrative Changes
Under the British, Singapore went through several changes in  
administration. These administrative changes influenced its growth as a 
port city. From 1819 to 1823, all decisions regarding Singapore had to be 
approved by Sir Stamford Raffles, who was the Lieutenant-Governor of 
Bencoolen. Singapore was placed under the control of India after Raffles 
returned for good to England in June 1823. In August 1824, Singapore was
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 95) ---
formally transferred to the EIC, which controlled Singapore from 1824 to 
1858. Look at Figure 3.5 below to see how Singapore was governed from 
1824 to 1942.
1824–1858
(In 1824, Singapore was 
formally transferred to the EIC 
and came under British control. 
In 1826, it became part of the 
Straits Settlements together 
with Penang and Melaka.)
 William Butterworth,  
Governor of the Straits Settlements  
(1843–1855)British government’s  
Board of Control and  
EIC Directors in London
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 95) ---
Board of Control and  
EIC Directors in London
Government in  
British India
Governor of the  
Straits Settlements1858–1867
(Singapore came under the 
administration of the India 
Office in London after the EIC 
was dissolved in 1858.)1867–1942
(Singapore became a Crown 
Colony and was transferred  
to the Colonial Office in  
London in 1867.)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 95) ---
to the Colonial Office in  
London in 1867.)
 Figure 3.5: Diagram showing an overview of how Singapore was governed from 1824 to 1942. The government in each row reported to the one above, as indicated by 
the arrows. Images of some of the British administrators in charge of Singapore over time can be seen in the table.
 Sir Harry Ord,  
Governor of the Straits Settlements  
(1867–1873) Sir William Cavenagh,  
Governor of the Straits Settlements  
(1859–1867)Governor of the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 95) ---
(1859–1867)Governor of the  
Straits SettlementsGovernor of the  
Straits SettlementsBritish government’s  
India Office * in London
Government in  
British IndiaBritish government’s  
Colonial Office† in London
86
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)* The India Office was a British government department established in 1858 to oversee the administration of British India.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 95) ---
† The Colonial Office in London was the government department in charge of British colonies throughout the world.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 96) ---
Late 19th-century opium den China Street, 1890s. China Street was once known 
for its numerous gambling dens.
 Singapore from Mount Wallich by Percy Carpenter, 
1856. This view of early Singapore stretches from 
Pearl’s Hill (left) to Tanjong Rhu (right). Mount 
Wallich (located at present-day Telok Ayer) was 
levelled to reclaim Telok Ayer Bay. Despite little 
financial resources provided by the EIC and the 
British India government before 1867, Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 96) ---
British India government before 1867, Singapore 
prospered, as shown by the increasing size of the 
town area in the painting.Administration by the East India Company and  
the British India Government (1819–1867)
When Singapore was established in 1819, it was placed under the 
administration of Bencoolen, where Raffles was Lieutenant-Governor. 
After Raffles returned to England for good in June 1823, Singapore was 
placed under the British India government. In 1824, Singapore was formally
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 96) ---
transferred to the East India Company (EIC), which controlled Singapore 
from 1824 to 1858. 
During this time, the government in Singapore had difficulty managing the 
needs of the expanding population and the increasing size of Singapore’s 
trade. At the same time, it had trouble raising money to pay for better port 
facilities, security and social services such as education and healthcare. 
When the government wanted to impose taxes on Singapore’s trade, the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 96) ---
traders protested. They argued that any proposals to tax trade would affect 
Singapore’s free-port status, which in turn would affect their businesses.
Unable to raise funds from imposing taxes on Singapore’s trade, the 
government had to turn to taxing gambling, opium and liquor. Owners 
of gambling houses, opium shops and liquor shops who could offer the 
largest sum of money to the government were granted the right to collect
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 96) ---
taxes. However, when gambling was banned in 1829, the tax on gambling 
houses could no longer be collected. This greatly reduced the government’s 
revenue. Thus, there was insufficient money for improving conditions in 
Singapore and for providing social services.
87
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 97) ---
To make up for the shortage, the EIC supplied the Singapore government 
with money. However, this changed in the 1830s, when the EIC lost its 
dominant control of trade with China as the British government opened it 
up to other British traders. 
Given that the EIC had founded the settlements in Penang and Singapore 
to protect and promote its China trade, it now lost interest in the Straits 
Settlements. As a trading company, the EIC prioritised maximising profits.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 97) ---
Since the Straits Settlements were being run at a loss, the EIC began to cut 
costs and refused to spend more money to improve the Straits Settlements.  
It dismissed many officials to reduce their number and cut the pay of 
those who remained.
 Illustration by Thomas Hosmer Shepherd showing the interior of the headquarters of the EIC at Leadenhall 
Street in London, where cargoes from the East were put up for auction, 1820. From this building, the EIC
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 97) ---
ruled over many parts of the world, including British India and the Straits Settlements, with little interference 
from the British government.
Why do you think  
the government in India 
showed little interest  
in the affairs of the  
Straits Settlements?Think!
88
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 98) ---
Administration as a Crown Colony (1867–1942)
The year 1867 was important in Singapore’s history as the colony was put 
under the direct control of the Colonial Office. The conversion of the 
Straits Settlements into a Crown Colony3 of Britain allowed Singapore to 
enjoy nearly 75 years of peaceful administration.
The Straits Settlements owes a debt of gratitude to the East India Company. It is true that by 1867, the prosperity of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 98) ---
Singapore was largely due to the resourcefulness of its people. However, it should not be forgotten that the Company 
established an able and just administration, which allowed Singapore to build up its trade freely. While it is easy to 
condemn the Company for being stingy, it was not a little thing that for 34 years from 1833 to 1867, the British India 
Government supported a constant drain on its finances to maintain a colony from which it gained no profit, and which
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 98) ---
hardly paid a cent in taxes.
– Adapted from an account by British historian L. A. Mills of the contributions of the East India Company  
and the British India government to the colony of Singapore before 1867, first published in 1925SOURCE 1
1. According to Source 1, how did Singapore benefit from being under the control of the EIC and the British India 
government?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 98) ---
government?
 Members of the Legislative Council in 1873, including Chief Justice Sir Thomas Sidgreaves (seated left), Governor Sir Harry Ord (seated right) and the sole Asian,  
Hoo Ah Kay, also known as Whampoa (standing second from right)Despite their lack of enthusiasm, the EIC and the British India government 
did contribute towards the development of Singapore. Read Source 1  
to find out more about what the EIC (1824–1858) and the British India
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 98) ---
government (1858–1867) did to help develop Singapore.
89
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?3 A Crown Colony refers to a place or territory directly ruled by the British government on behalf of the British King or Queen.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 99) ---
In the following sections, you will read more about the initial problems 
faced by the early police force and the gradual reforms introduced to 
improve its quality in the early 20th century. Besides maintaining law and 
order in Singapore, the government also attempted to curb piracy in its 
surrounding waters that affected its trade.Figure 3.6 below gives an overview of the British administration in Singapore 
from 1867 to 1942.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 99) ---
from 1867 to 1942.
 Figure 3.6: Overview of the structure of government in Singapore when the British administered Singapore from 1867 to 1942British Government in London (Colonial Office)
• Responsible for British colonies around the world
Governor of the Straits Settlements
• Represented the King or Queen of Britain
• Assisted by an Executive Council and a Legislative Council
• Had veto power (the ability to reject laws passed by the 
Legislative Council)
Executive Council
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 99) ---
Legislative Council)
Executive Council
• Comprised high-ranking British officials
• Advised the Governor and helped him 
carry out the lawsLegislative Council
• Comprised high-ranking British officials 
from the Executive Council and  
non-official members who were mainly 
Asian and European traders
• Helped the Governor make laws
90
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
 Whitehall in London, where the Colonial Office 
was located, 1866
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 100) ---
Law and Order
Crime
Singapore’s population increased from barely 150 in 1819 to about 6,000 
in 1821. Large numbers of settlers continued to come into Singapore 
thereafter. A census4 taken in 1911 showed that there were 57 different 
languages spoken among the population. With the influx of migrants5 
and the growth of trade, there were also more robberies, murders and 
other crimes. Maintaining law and order was a challenge.
Police Force
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 100) ---
Police Force
In 1820, William Farquhar, the Resident of Singapore, made his son-in-law, 
Francis James Bernard, the chief police officer. However, Bernard had other 
duties and could not give all his time and attention to his police work. 
Moreover, the police force was a very small one, consisting of the chief 
police officer, one writer, one jailor in charge of the prison, one European 
sergeant and eight Asian policemen. This was hardly enough to keep the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 100) ---
peace in a population of a few thousand settlers.
Over the years, the police force remained small and weak. In 1843, some 
European and Asian traders in Singapore called a public meeting to talk 
about the inability of the small police force to maintain law and order. 
The traders then wrote to the Governor to ask for a stronger police force. 
They pointed out that the many crimes on the island made their lives and 
property unsafe.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 100) ---
property unsafe.
As a result, Thomas Dunman was appointed as Deputy Magistrate and 
Deputy Superintendent of Police in 1843, and as Singapore’s first full-time 
Commissioner of Police in 1857. During his tenure, Dunman persisted in 
making the police force more appealing to potential recruits by fighting 
for better working conditions and higher wages. In doing so, he managed 
to attract better men into the police force. Thus, he was able to enlarge
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 100) ---
the police force by taking in more men, especially those of good character.  The Central Police Station located  
on Hill Street, 1869Thomas Dunman (1814–1887) was 
respected by both European officials 
and traders, and had useful contacts 
with the Chinese community. A very 
hands-on man, he was usually out at 
night performing different duties. His 
daily schedule saw him up and about 
at four in the morning, only returning 
home at midnight. Dunman took 
good care of the men under him and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 100) ---
good care of the men under him and 
even conducted night classes to teach 
them to read and write. He received 
a Sword of Honour from Governor 
Butterworth for putting down the 1854 
Hokkien-Teochew Riots. Dunman 
Road, Dunman Secondary School and 
Dunman High School are all named 
after him.
Who was  
THOMAS DUNMAN?
?
91
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 100) ---
after him.
Who was  
THOMAS DUNMAN?
?
91
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?4 A census refers to an official survey or count of people living in a country.
5 Migrants are people who move from one place to another, mostly in search of employment. Some migrants may also be 
fleeing from war or disasters.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 101) ---
Illustration showing a policeman with two thieves, c. 1890s
 Policemen standing outside 
Tanjong Pagar Police Station, 
1880
92
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 102) ---
Despite Dunman’s best efforts, he could not solve all the problems of 
crime and disorder. His men did their work well and tried to manage the 
situation when serious riots broke out, but the rioters usually outnumbered 
them and the government had to send soldiers to help the police. Still, by 
the time Dunman retired in 1871, he had achieved much by reducing gang 
robberies and improving the quality and morale of the police officers.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 102) ---
After Dunman’s retirement, reforms to the police force continued.  
A police training school was started in 1881, and a separate detective force 
was established in 1884.
By the 1930s, with the use of telephones, motor cars and radio 
communications, the work of the police force had become more efficient. 
At the same time, officers who had gone through professional training 
under the police cadet system filled senior posts in the police force.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 102) ---
The police force was about 2,000 strong, unlike the small team it started 
with in the early 1820s. All these improvements made Singapore a safer and 
more peaceful place.
 Officers from the Detective Branch, 1906. This branch was later renamed the Criminal Investigation Department (CID).Riots broke out quite frequently in  
19th-century Singapore. Among the  
largest were the Hokkien-Teochew  
Riots in May 1854 that left about 500 
dead and some 300 homes destroyed.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 102) ---
dead and some 300 homes destroyed. 
Other major riots included the 1876 
Chinese Post Office Riots and the  
1888 Verandah Riots.DID YOU KNOW?
93
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 103) ---
Labour Abuses, Secret Society Problems and Prostitution
As Singapore grew as a commercial centre, it attracted more and more 
Chinese migrants, who were drawn by the prospect of work as well as 
the opportunity to flee from wars, poverty and famine in China. By 1871, 
the Chinese community comprised 58 per cent of Singapore’s population, 
numbering about 55,000 in total. However, Singapore’s rapid development 
and prosperity had another dark side: labour abuses, secret society
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 103) ---
problems and prostitution.
 Mural by Yip Yew Chong showing the arrival of 
coolies in Singapore. This mural can be found on 
Amoy Street, outside Thian Hock Keng Temple. Model of a ship the Chinese migrants took to  
come to Singapore. This model can be found at  
Fuk Tak Chi Temple along Telok Ayer Street, first 
constructed in 1824. The temple was one of the 
first stops for Cantonese and Hakka migrants 
arriving from China. They would go there to offer
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 103) ---
thanksgiving for their safe passage to Singapore.
94
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 104) ---
Diorama at Fuk Tak Chi Museum showing migrants at work 
95
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 105) ---
Labour Abuse of Coolies
The Chinese migrants who came to Singapore were known as sinkehs (new 
guests). Some had the money to pay for their passage from China. When 
they arrived in Singapore, they were free to take on any job they found.
However, there were others who were too poor to pay for their passage 
and had to find a coolie-agent, who would pay their passage money.  
In return, these coolies promised to work for any employer who was
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 105) ---
willing to pay the coolie-agent a sum of money to employ them (see Figure 
3.7). This sum was much more than the passage money, as it included the 
coolie-agent’s fee. The coolies would then have to work without pay for 
a year or more to pay off the debts they owed their employers for paying 
the coolie-agents. They were usually provided with food and lodgings, and 
might be given a small sum of money for the whole period of their service.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 105) ---
The demand for Chinese coolies in the mid-19th century was not limited 
to Singapore. There was also a great need for them in Australia, the United 
States, the plantations in Java and Sumatra, and the tin mines in Malaya. 
The coolie trade grew very quickly, and Singapore became one of its major 
centres. Thousands of coolies poured into Singapore every year, many of 
whom were then sent to work in neighbouring countries or to other parts
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 105) ---
of the world. This photograph, taken in the early part of the  
20th century, shows a Chinese coolie carrying  
a gunny sack, a common sight in Singapore  
during the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Cannot afford passage money
Can afford passage money
 Figure 3.7: Diagram showing the relationship between coolies, coolie-agents and employersCoolie wants to  
work in Singapore 
• Employer employs coolie
• Coolies who cannot afford 
passage money work to pay
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 105) ---
passage money work to pay 
off their debtsCoolie arrives in Singapore 
and is free to find any work Coolie finds coolie-agent, who 
pays for his passage money
• Employer pays coolie-agent 
the coolie’s passage money 
and the coolie-agent’s fee
• Coolie-agent matches coolie 
to employer
Employer
Coolie
Coolie-Agent
96
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 106) ---
1. What does Source 2 tell you about the way the coolies were brought into Singapore?
2. What do the two sources suggest about the coolies’ experiences?Coolie-agents were responsible for finding coolies to meet the demand 
in different parts of the world. They were often tempted by huge profits, 
and thus tried to obtain coolies by any means possible. While thousands 
of poor Chinese were willing to seek their fortunes abroad, many others 
were tricked or kidnapped by coolie-agents in China.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 106) ---
Conditions during the voyage from China were very poor. The coolie ships 
were often described as “floating hells” . It was common for hundreds of 
men to be crammed aboard a junk meant for a fraction of the number. As 
a result of the overcrowding as well as the lack of food and water, many 
coolies died during the long voyage.
The coolies’ misery did not end when they landed in Singapore. To prevent 
them from escaping, many of them were locked up in houses that were
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 106) ---
cramped and unhygienic. They were closely guarded by gangsters hired by 
the coolie-agents until employers were found. 
Read Sources 2 and 3 to learn more about how the coolies were treated.
The coolies are mostly from the countryside of China. They all cried out for protection. They declared that they had been 
tricked to leave their homes by promises that they would be brought to Singapore and receive good wages as labourers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 106) ---
and craftsmen. There was a promise that after paying a low sum for their journey, they would soon save enough money 
to send to their friends or to return home with. Instead, they had heard that they would be sent to work in the tin mines 
of another country. 
We went to inspect a house in Telok Ayer, where the coolies had been confined. We found the place to be unfit even to keep 
pigs. Many men were confined here without notice.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 106) ---
pigs. Many men were confined here without notice.
- Adapted from a report that William Pickering, Protector of the Chinese in Singapore,  
submitted to the Legislative Council in Singapore on February 1877SOURCE 2
A friend of mine suggested I leave China by saying, “Look how poor you are here. If you follow me, I can take you to 
Singapore, where you will get such good employment. Very soon you will pay off the small amount of passage money
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 106) ---
required and will save a lot of money.’’ On arriving in Singapore, we were taken to a shop upstairs and were locked up, 
only having very little rice and saltfish. We could not go out for anything. I don’t complain much about food, as long as I 
can get some work to make money. But we were not allowed to speak up or know what was being done with us.
– Adapted from an account given by a coolie named Lew Ship Yit to William Pickering,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 106) ---
Protector of the Chinese in Singapore, in the late 1870sSOURCE 3 Boat arriving in Singapore with Chinese coolies,  
c. 1900. The original photograph was in black 
and white. Colour has been added to it digitally in 
recent times to enhance its effect.
97
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 107) ---
Secret Society Problems
The large number of Chinese migrants in Singapore saw 
the emergence of another problem: secret societies.6
Many of those who arrived from China found it useful 
to join a secret society. They were mostly poor and 
uneducated young men who had never been outside 
their hometown. In Singapore, where they were far from 
their families and friends, they felt lonely and helpless. 
Thus, when they were befriended by members of a secret
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 107) ---
society who helped them to find work or lodgings, they 
would end up joining the secret society.
As members, they could enjoy the protection of the 
society. For example, when they became sick, the secret 
society would take care of them. When poor members 
died without anyone to bury them, the secret society 
would arrange for a proper burial.
By the 1840s, there were several secret societies with 
thousands of members. Their numbers increased with the 
rapid growth of the Chinese population.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 107) ---
rapid growth of the Chinese population. 
Despite the support they provided to the migrants, secret 
societies were also a source of problems. Members of 
secret societies often took part in gang robberies, gang 
fights and other forms of lawlessness. Gangs of up to 200 
secret society members would carry out armed robberies, 
usually at night but sometimes in broad daylight, on 
the homes of the rich. These secret societies were also 
responsible for many of the riots that occurred in the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 107) ---
1840s and 1850s as they fought for the control of territory 
and illegal vice trades such as gambling and prostitution.
For a long time, the government took no steps to tackle 
the problem. This was because the British officials had 
few dealings with most of the Chinese living in Singapore 
and knew very little about how these secret societies 
operated. Until the 1870s, there were no British officials 
who understood the various Chinese dialects. The
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 107) ---
who understood the various Chinese dialects. The 
European officers in the police force and all the policemen, 
who were Indians and Malays, did not speak the language 
either, and could not find out anything about the secret 
societies and their activities.
 Headline of an article published on 25 July 1974 in  
The New Nation reflecting on the impact of the 1854 Hokkien-
Teochew Riots caused by members of secret societies, which
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 107) ---
paralysed 19th-century Singapore Seal used by the Ghee Hin Kongsi, 
one of the first secret societies  
in Singapore, to indicate the 
completed payment of membership 
fees, 1913
 A receipt given for contribution 
to Ghee Hin Society, late 
19th century. These receipts 
were used to acknowledge 
monetary contributions made 
by members of the society.
98
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 107) ---
by members of the society.
98
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)6 The Chinese secret societies in Singapore were a form of mutual aid for the migrants who came from different parts of China 
in the 19th century. Their origins can be traced to the Tiandihui (Heaven and Earth Society), a secret society in China founded 
for the purpose of overthrowing the Qing dynasty and restoring the Ming dynasty.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 108) ---
Artist’s impression of the 1854 Hokkien-Teochew Riots. The riots started because of conflicts between  
the Hokkien and the Teochew communities in Singapore. They lasted 10 days and military troops had  
to be summoned to help the small police force restore order.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 109) ---
19th-century illustration showing the interior of  
the Ghee Hin Kongsi, with details of the rites of  
the initiation ceremony
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 110) ---
Prostitution
The majority of migrants who came to Singapore for work were Chinese 
males. Most of these migrants were unmarried or had left their wives in 
their homelands. Few Chinese migrant women came to Singapore as it was 
seen as a man’s responsibility to earn a living elsewhere. This resulted in a 
very unbalanced ratio of men to women in Singapore (see Figure 3.8 below). 
As working conditions were hard for the male migrants, many turned to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 110) ---
opium smoking, drinking, gambling and visiting brothels7 to escape the 
hardship. 
There was great demand for prostitutes, which meant that brothel owners 
and traffickers8 could make large profits. In the latter part of the 19th 
century, many young, female migrants from China were tricked into the 
prostitution trade in Singapore. They were promised well-paid jobs, but 
when they arrived in Singapore, they were sold to keepers of brothels and 
forced to earn money for them.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 110) ---
forced to earn money for them.
 Postcard from “Fuji” restaurant at 3 Malay Street 
(present-day indoor street in Bugis Junction 
shopping mall) showing a Japanese lady, c. 1920. 
Restaurants like these were used by Japanese 
prostitutes, known as karayuki-san, to seek or 
meet customers.During the 19th century, Singapore 
was not only a trading port city. It also 
had a reputation of being a sleazy place 
where prostitutes were regarded as 
part and parcel of daily life.DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 110) ---
part and parcel of daily life.DID YOU KNOW?
 Figure 3.8: Chart showing the ratio of female to male Chinese in Singapore between 1860 and 1901. For example, in 1860, there were 14 Chinese men for every 
Chinese woman in Singapore.1860 1 : 14
1 : 5
1 : 41881
1901
Legend Female Chinese Male Chinese
 Photograph showing a pipa tsai (Cantonese for 
“little pipa player”), late 19th century. The pipa,  
or Chinese lute, is a four-stringed musical 
instrument made of wood. These girls were trained
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 110) ---
to play the instrument and sing to entertain men 
in clubs and brothels in Singapore. In some cases, 
the pipa tsai were forced into prostitution.
101
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?7 A brothel is a place where people engage in prostitution.
8 A trafficker is a person who unlawfully transports people or forces them to work in order to benefit from their work or service.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 111) ---
Chinese Protectorate and the  
Dangerous Societies Ordinance
It was only after the transfer of Singapore to the Colonial Office in 
1867 that the government made a greater effort to control the Chinese 
population. In May 1877, a government department called the Chinese 
Protectorate was set up to tackle the problems of secret societies, coolie 
abuses, poverty and prostitution among the Chinese community.
The head of the department was William Pickering – the first Protector
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 111) ---
of the Chinese. Pickering’s tact, fluency in several Chinese dialects and 
personality helped him gain the trust of the Chinese. He was thus able to 
develop a comprehensive understanding of the complicated operations of 
secret societies. Along with improvements in policing, Pickering managed 
to bring some sense of order to Singapore society. Take a look at the 
illustrated story on the next page to find out more about the work of the 
Chinese Protectorate.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 111) ---
Chinese Protectorate.
Apart from establishing the Chinese Protectorate, the government also 
pushed through a law to suppress9 dangerous societies and make them 
automatically unlawful. The 1890 Dangerous Societies Ordinance gave the 
Governor the power to banish Chinese migrants and abolish any society 
deemed too dangerous. The threat of banishment was particularly effective 
as the Qing government often arrested and executed such individuals once
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 111) ---
they returned to China. Thus, although disturbances continued to take 
place after the passing of this law, the days of large-scale secret society 
fights that paralysed Singapore were over.
 William Pickering, first Protector of the Chinese  
in Singapore (1877–1889)
 The Chinese Protectorate building located on 
Havelock Road, c. 1910s
102
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)9 To suppress something is to put an end to it.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 112) ---
All Chinese societies had to register 
with the Chinese Protectorate. 
The Chinese Protectorate controlled the coolie trade by registering 
the coolie-agents and lodging houses. Pickering’s officers visited 
every coolie ship that arrived from China and inspected the coolie 
houses to ensure that the coolies were treated fairly.The Chinese Protectorate worked 
with the leaders of the Chinese secret 
societies to build trust between the 
British and the community.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 112) ---
British and the community.
The Protectorate set up a department called  
Po Leung Kuk (Cantonese for “Office to 
Protect Virtue”), which rescued many young 
girls from being sold to brothels. It also 
provided shelter for those who were poorly 
treated as servants.Despite the government’s best efforts, it was unable to 
completely reduce the power of the secret societies. Fights  
still broke out occasionally and the abuse of coolies and 
women continued. This was partly because some of the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 112) ---
coolies and women did not come forward to seek the help  
of the Protectorate.Pickering persuaded the Chinese community to 
settle their quarrels at the Chinese Protectorate 
instead of going to the secret societies. The WO R K  of the CHINESE PROTECTORATEThe WO R K  of the CHINESE PROTECTORATE
103
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 113) ---
Piracy
Apart from dealing with law and order within Singapore, the government 
also had to tackle the problem of piracy in the region. Although it did 
not directly affect most of the people in Singapore, piracy posed a great 
danger to the lives, property and trade of the trading community. Trading 
ships plying10 the Straits of Melaka were often attacked by pirates, their 
cargoes taken, and travellers killed or sold as slaves.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 113) ---
Every year the “pirate wind” , or the season between August and October, 
brought large fleets of pirate boats from northern Borneo to the Straits of 
Melaka, where they attacked the trading ships and boats sailing between 
Singapore and Penang. Throughout the year, trading ships were also 
attacked by pirates who came from pirate settlements along the coasts of 
Java, Sumatra and Malaya.
The situation became so bad that pirates could be seen attacking ships just
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 113) ---
outside Singapore’s harbour. Because of this, many traders stayed away. 
Thus, Singapore’s trade suffered greatly and the traders lost huge sums of 
money.
The traders repeatedly asked the government in the Straits Settlements 
to take strong action against piracy. However, the Straits Settlements 
government lacked the legal means to punish the pirates and had to send 
them to India for trial. Only after many appeals by the 
traders did the government in India send gunboats to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 113) ---
patrol the waters.
While the gunboats destroyed many pirate ships 
and hideouts, this was only a temporary solution. 
To suppress piracy completely, a permanent naval 
force was needed in the Straits Settlements, 
something the EIC could not afford. Since the 
Straits government had only three gunboats in 
its fleet, it was unable to curb piracy effectively.
Attempts by the traders in Singapore to urge 
the authorities in both India and London 
to take action did not result in much
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 113) ---
to take action did not result in much 
change. It was only in the early 1870s 
that piracy became less of a problem 
due to increased patrolling by the 
British and other European powers.
19th-century illustration of an Iranun pirate. The Iranun people 
came from Mindanao (part of present-day Philippines) and 
northern Borneo (part of present-day Sabah), and had a  
fearsome reputation for their raids on ships in the region.
104
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 113) ---
104
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)10 To ply is to travel regularly over a fixed course or between certain places.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 114) ---
Artist’s impression of a pirate battle off the  
coast of Singapore in the mid-19th century
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 115) ---
Education
Educational Opportunities (1819–1867)
For the most part of the 19th century, the British government provided 
few education and healthcare services for the people in Singapore. 
Much of the population were migrants more interested in making money 
before returning home than settling down and raising families. Coupled 
with the government’s constant lack of funds, this created a situation 
in which the provision of social services was not a top priority for the  
British government.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 115) ---
British government.
From Singapore’s founding till 1867, the British paid little attention to 
education. They did not control English or vernacular education11 and 
focused only on subsidising a few schools. While the British provided 
free primary schooling in the Malay language, very few Tamil-language 
schools were established by the government and none were catered for 
the Chinese population.
By and large, the British left the development of education in the hands
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 115) ---
of those who were concerned about it. In other words, schools devised 
their own ways of organising classes, the number and choice of subjects, 
and how they were taught. From 1830 to 1867, there were very few schools 
established by the government. Instead, the establishment of schools was 
left mostly to the efforts of various Christian missionary12 groups and 
European traders.
Before 1867, there were few educational opportunities for children as many
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 115) ---
parents did not see the value of English-language education. Few students 
attended these schools. Chinese education, apart from opportunities to 
study Chinese at the Singapore Institution (present-day Raffles Institution), 
was practically non-existent. Raffles Institution located on Bras Basah Road,  
c. 1900
106
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 115) ---
c. 1900
106
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)11 Vernacular education refers to education conducted in the native languages of the main communities, in this case, the Malay, 
Chinese and Indian communities in Singapore.
12 A missionary is a person who visits a place with a religious mission. In this case, the missionaries were people who visited 
Singapore to spread the teachings of their faith.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 116) ---
Anglo-Tamil School established by the Methodist 
Mission, c. 1880s
 The Chinese High School (present-day Hwa Chong 
Institution) established in 1919 by Tan Kah Kee,  
c. 1938
 Music lesson in session at Convent of the Holy 
Infant Jesus school on Victoria Street, 1924Educational Opportunities (1867–1942)
From 1867 onwards, educational activities in Singapore grew. The expansion 
of education in this period was based on the principle of meeting the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 116) ---
needs of the British colonial administration. With Singapore’s rapid socio-
economic development after 1867, it became necessary to provide English 
education to create a supply of English-speaking clerks in the government 
and companies. The British government took deliberate steps to promote 
English as the medium of instruction, providing government grants to 
schools that imparted English to students whose home language was not 
English.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 116) ---
English.
As for education that did not directly support trade and government 
administration in Singapore, it was usually left to non-governmental 
agencies. This had two major consequences. First, it led to the growth of 
many Chinese schools run by the Chinese community from 1911 onwards. 
These schools did not tolerate any interference from the government. 
Second, schools established by Christian missionaries were given a free 
hand in how they were run.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 116) ---
hand in how they were run.
In summary, from 1867 to 1942, although there were improvements in 
the educational provisions by the government, there was a distinct lack 
of quality education that catered for the needs of the local people. 
Educational opportunities were primarily provided to meet the needs of 
the colonial administration. In the next chapter, you will find out more 
about the other types of schools established by the various communities
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 116) ---
who donated land and money to build schools to give students a chance 
to learn.
107
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 117) ---
Healthcare
For a number of decades after the British trading post in Singapore was 
founded, the government did not provide medical services for the general 
public. There were only one or two government doctors who looked after 
sick soldiers in a military hospital, and a few European doctors who served 
mostly the Europeans and rich Asians.
The poorer Asians were not so fortunate as they could not afford proper 
medical treatment. Before the 1860s, due to poverty, the Asian population
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 117) ---
suffered from malnutrition, overcrowding and poor sanitation. These 
problems contributed to the high death rate among the Asian population 
in Singapore.
After Singapore became a Crown Colony in 1867, coordinated attempts 
were made to improve public health. In 1887, the government set up 
the Public Health Department to tackle health issues in the town area. 
Some of the measures included setting up a malaria (a mosquito-borne
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 117) ---
disease) committee to supervise the draining of swamps, replacing the 
bucket system with a modern water-carriage sewerage system and clearing 
dirty streets and drains. Attempts were also made to improve housing 
conditions, such as reducing overcrowding in living quarters in Chinatown.
 One of the streets in Chinatown where coolies 
stayed, c. 1930 Night-soil carriers, late 19th century. Before the 
days of the toilet bowl and sewerage system, 
people used to excrete in buckets, which were
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 117) ---
people used to excrete in buckets, which were 
cleared daily by the night-soil carriers.
108
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 118) ---
Public healthcare was also improved with the completion of a new 
general hospital building at Outram Road in 1882. The hospital started off 
as a shed near Bras Basah Road and Stamford Road in the early years of  
Singapore’s founding. Its site changed several times before it finally settled 
at Outram Road.
To prevent infectious diseases such as smallpox and cholera from 
spreading, a quarantine13 law was passed in 1886 whereby passengers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 118) ---
arriving in Singapore by sea had to be checked by a doctor. Those found to 
be suffering from infectious diseases were isolated to prevent the diseases 
from spreading.
Despite these steps by the government, the death rate was still higher than 
the birth rate. For example, from 1896 to 1900, the birth rate was 3,835 births 
per year as compared to the death rate, which was 8,847 deaths per year. The General Hospital at Outram Road,  
early 20th century
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 118) ---
early 20th century
 Male migrants at the screening and quarantine 
station at St John’s Island, c. 1930
A quarantine station operated on  
St John’s Island for slightly more than 
100 years before it was officially closed 
on 14 January 1976.DID YOU KNOW?
109
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?13 A quarantine describes a time during which people, in this case migrants, suspected of carrying contagious diseases such as
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 118) ---
smallpox and cholera are held in isolation away from the main population.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 119) ---
Living conditions in a typical shophouse  
in Chinatown, c. 1907
 Living conditions of rickshaw pullers and labourers in a shophouse, c. 1941One reason for the high death rate was the overcrowded and unhygienic 
living conditions of the poor in the town area. Due to the availability of jobs 
there, many of the workers preferred to stay in shophouses in the town 
area. However, these shophouses were often overcrowded, unsanitary and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 119) ---
poorly ventilated. This gave rise to the spread of highly contagious diseases 
such as tuberculosis and cholera, which affected many of these workers.
Another reason was the poor understanding of certain diseases in the 
19th century. For example, it was not until 1897 that Sir Ronald Ross 
discovered that malaria was transmitted by a type of mosquito. Before 
that, doctors thought the disease was caused by poisonous air coming
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 119) ---
out of rotting plants in swampy areas. Moreover, most Asians did not seek 
treatment when they were ill due to the lack of money or a mistrust of  
Western medicine.
By the beginning of the 1940s, public health had generally improved due 
to two reasons. First, economic growth in Singapore generated greater 
government spending on healthcare. Second, the increased awareness of 
the need to improve healthcare led to calls by the local people for the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 119) ---
government to tackle the spread of diseases in Singapore.
110
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 120) ---
Facilities
Expansion of Port Facilities
The process of improving Singapore’s port facilities 
started in the 1850s, along with the expansion of 
Singapore’s trade and the arrival of steamships. By 
this time, the Old Harbour at the Singapore River 
had become increasingly overcrowded. There was 
insufficient space along the river banks to build more 
warehouses for storing goods and coal, or to build dry 
docks for ship-repairing.
In 1852, the New Harbour (renamed Keppel Harbour in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 120) ---
1900) was built in the strait between the southern coast 
of Singapore island and two smaller islands – Pulau 
Brani and Pulau Blakang Mati (present-day Sentosa). 
The harbour had deep waters, allowing steamships and 
sailing ships to sail right up to it. It was also sheltered 
from strong winds and big waves by the two smaller 
islands.
 Illustration showing the opening of the third dock 
at the New Harbour, 1869 Map 3.1: Map showing the location of the Old and New Harbours
N
OLD HARBOUR
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 120) ---
N
OLD HARBOUR
NEW HARBOURPulau Brani
Pulau Blakang MatiSingapore Island
111
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 121) ---
Singapore’s port facilities expanded further in the late 19th and early 
20th centuries, as its trade and industries continued to grow. In 1913, the 
government set up the Singapore Harbour Board (present-day Maritime 
and Port Authority of Singapore [MPA]) to make further improvements to 
the port.
New wharves, docks, storehouses and machine shops were built. Modern 
machinery, such as forklifts, cranes and tractors, was used for loading and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 121) ---
unloading goods. The modernisation of the port was done just in time 
to cope with the increasing world demand for tin and rubber, and the 
rapid opening of plantations in Singapore and Malaya. (See pages 116–119 
for more information on the impact of the growth of the tin and rubber 
industries on Singapore.)
A railway system was also set up to link the port to parts of Malaya. 
Subsequently, in 1924, the Causeway between Singapore and Malaya was 
opened.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 121) ---
opened.
Collectively, these changes improved the services provided to ships that 
called at the port. These improvements helped in part to make Singapore 
one of the busiest and most prosperous ports in Asia.
 The opening of the Causeway, seen here in 1925, 
helped improve links between Singapore and Malaya. Façade of Tanjong Pagar Railway Station, c. 1932. 
The station served as the southern terminus of the 
railway network connecting Malaya to Singapore.
Coin divers, like the ones shown
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 121) ---
Coin divers, like the ones shown 
below, were a familiar sight to 
passengers passing through or 
disembarking at the New Harbour. 
These divers plunged into the waters to 
bring up a stone in exchange for a few 
coins from passers-by on nearby boats. 
This sport continued to entertain new 
arrivals in the harbour till the 1920s.DID YOU KNOW?
 Illustration showing local youths diving for 
coins at the New Harbour, 1872
112
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 122) ---
What Impact Did External 
Developments Have on Singapore’s 
Growth as a Port City?
In the second half of the 19th century, Singapore’s trade significantly 
expanded due to a number of external developments, in particular, 
the opening of the Suez Canal and the expansion of the tin and rubber 
industries. However, with the onset of the Great Depression in the early 
1930s, Singapore’s trade and industries took a hit.
Suez Canal
Opening of the Suez Canal
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 122) ---
Suez Canal
Opening of the Suez Canal
Prior to the opening of the Suez Canal on 17 November 1869, ships travelling 
between Europe and Asia had to make a long and often dangerous journey 
around the Cape of Good Hope at the southern tip of Africa. The journey 
from London to Singapore usually took at least 120 days. This changed with 
the opening of the Suez Canal (see Map 3.2).
Not only was the Suez route shorter than the Cape route, the faster
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 122) ---
steamships were increasingly used instead of the slower sailing ships. The 
journey from London to Singapore now only took about 50 days. Within a 
few years of its opening, the Suez Canal became one of the busiest waterways 
in the world. Close-up showing the location of the Suez Canal
CHINABRITAIN
Singapore
AUSTRALIAINDIA
Legend
Suez route
Cape routeAFRICAASIAEUROPE
Cape of Good HopeLondon
Suez Canal
INDIAN OCEANATLANTIC OCEANStraits of Melaka
Sunda StraitsN
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 122) ---
Sunda StraitsN
 Map 3.2: Comparison of the Suez and Cape routes
CairoMediterranean Sea
Red SeaGulf of SuezNileSuez Canal
113
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 123) ---
Opening of the Suez Canal, 17 November 1869
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 124) ---
Impact of the Opening of the Suez Canal on Singapore
Singapore benefitted greatly from the opening of the Suez Canal in several 
ways. First, it shortened the time needed for people, mail and cargo to 
travel from Europe to Singapore. This meant lower shipping costs because 
of the savings in distance and time.
Second, it increased the volume of ships passing through the Straits of 
Melaka and calling at the port of Singapore to refuel and collect food
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 124) ---
supplies. The Straits of Melaka overtook the Sunda Straits as the main 
route from Europe to the Far East, thus securing Singapore’s dominance  
in the region.
Third, it led to the increased use of steamships as sailing ships could not 
use the Suez Canal throughout the year. This enhanced Singapore’s role 
as a coaling station. Despite advances in marine technology, steamships 
travelling long distances had to stop at regular intervals to refuel with huge 
quantities of coal and fresh water.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 124) ---
quantities of coal and fresh water.
As a result, a series of coaling stations developed along these shipping 
routes from southern Asia, down the Straits of Melaka and into the South 
China Sea. Singapore, as one of these coaling stations, became even more 
important in the trade between Europe and the Asia Pacific region.Apart from the Suez Canal, alternative 
routes across the Pacific and the  
North American continent were 
considered. Among them was the 
Panama Canal route, which was
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 124) ---
Panama Canal route, which was 
opened on 15 August 1914. DID YOU KNOW?
 Illustration showing a steamship docking at  
a coaling station at the New Harbour, 1876
115
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942? Coolies coaling a steamship in Singapore, 1900s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 125) ---
Tin and Rubber Industries
Expansion of the Tin Industry and Its Impact on Singapore
For most of the 19th century, Singapore’s entrepôt trade relied on  
an extensive and sea-based hinterland 14 that stretched from the  
South China Sea to the Indian Ocean. This trade involved mainly goods 
such as agar-agar, beeswax, opium and tobacco. However, by the end of the 
century, Singapore, with a more clearly defined land-based hinterland in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 125) ---
Malaya, had gradually become the port from which Malayan commodities 
such as tin and rubber were processed and exported to the rest of  
the world.
The expansion of the tin trade was due largely to external developments. 
First, the spread of British control to parts of Malaya after 1874 led to 
peaceful conditions there. This facilitated the development of tin mining 
and the tin trade. At the same time, the canning industry in the United
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 125) ---
States was expanding, which resulted in a corresponding increase in the 
demand for tin.
All this led to the growth of trade between Malaya and the Straits 
Settlements, especially Singapore. This growing trade added a great deal 
to the volume of trade that Singapore was already conducting with other 
parts of the world.
 Tin mining in Perak, Malaya, c. 1910s Advertisement for Highland Brand Evaporated 
Cream, a popular brand of canned concentrated 
milk in the US in the late 19th century
116
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 125) ---
milk in the US in the late 19th century
116
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)14 A hinterland is an area supplying raw materials and goods, especially trade goods, to a port.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 126) ---
The amount of tin produced in Malaya increased rapidly, partly because of 
the new machinery and new methods of mining that began to be used by 
the Chinese and European miners. In 1874, Malaya was the fourth-largest  
tin producer in the world. By the 1890s, it was producing more than half of 
the world’s tin. 
From 1890, a large part of Malayan tin was brought to Singapore as tin 
ore, which is tin that has not been purified. At a tin smelting 15 factory
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 126) ---
established by the Straits Trading Company on Pulau Brani, the tin ore was 
smelted and made into blocks of almost 100 per cent pure tin. By the early 
20th century, the factory had become the leading tin smelter in the world.
The tin smelting industry and the tin trade brought handsome profits to 
many businessmen in Singapore. They also increased the general prosperity 
of the island. By the end of the 19th century, tin had become the most
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 126) ---
important item of trade among the imports and exports handled by 
Singapore traders. Pineapple canning factory in Singapore,  
c. 1908
 View from Mount Faber showing Pulau Brani  
and Pulau Blakang Mati in the background, 1900s. 
The chimneys on Pulau Brani were part of the 
Straits Trading Company’s tin smelter.
1875 1880 1885 1890 189510,00020,00030,00040,00050,000Tonnes
(1 tonne = 1,000 kg)
Year
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 126) ---
(1 tonne = 1,000 kg)
Year
 Figure 3.9: Bar graph showing the amount of tin produced in Malaya from 1875 to 1895. New mines were opened up between 1875 and 1895.8,566 tonnes11,735 tonnes17,319 tonnes27,200 tonnes49,592 tonnesPineapples were commonly available 
in Singapore from the mid-1800s. 
However, they spoilt easily. One 
solution was to preserve them in tin 
cans. By the early 1920s, Singapore had 
become one of the leading exporters of 
canned pineapples in the world.DID YOU KNOW?
117
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 126) ---
canned pineapples in the world.DID YOU KNOW?
117
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?15 Smelting is a process for extracting metal, such as tin, from its natural form, by applying heat.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 127) ---
Expansion of the Rubber Industry and Its Impact  
on Singapore
In the early part of the 20th century, Singapore also exported rubber 
in large quantities. For many years before that, plantation owners had 
shown little interest in growing rubber as an agricultural crop. However, 
this changed when the motor car industry created a new demand for  
rubber tyres.
It began in the later part of the 19th century, when the rubber industry took
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 127) ---
an important step forward with John Dunlop’s invention of the pneumatic 
tyre (hollow tyre filled with air). Bicycles could now be fitted with these 
tyres instead of solid tyres. More importantly, the pneumatic tyre made 
possible the rise of the motor car industry.
The production of millions of cars in the United States led to a great 
demand for rubber for making tyres. As the supply of rubber from Brazil 
and Africa was insufficient to meet this demand, the price of rubber shot
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 127) ---
up very quickly. Because of this, planters in Malaya became interested 
in growing rubber on a large scale and hurried to the Singapore Botanic 
Gardens to ask for seeds.
 This photograph shows a new method of tapping rubber trees without 
damaging the bark, discovered by Henry Ridley in 1897. Turning latex into rubber sheets in Malaya, c. 1900s
2Tapping rubber trees for their latex Processing the latex into rubber sheets
 Figure 3.10: Flowchart showing the processing of rubber
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 127) ---
1 Rubber seeds 1909–1910 Model T by Ford Motor Company
Singapore’s first rubber plantation was 
in Punggol, where rubber trees were 
grown in a coconut plantation in 1907.DID YOU KNOW?
118
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 128) ---
Henry Ridley (left) at the Singapore Botanic Gardens 
with one of the rubber trees grown from a batch of 
seedlings from Kew Gardens in London, c. 1905The planters in Malaya were not the only ones who turned to rubber 
planting. European and Chinese traders in Singapore also realised that they 
could make a fortune from the rubber boom by providing capital16 to open 
rubber plantations. Several large European companies in Singapore formed
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 128) ---
rubber companies in England. These new companies in England then sold 
shares (investments by individuals for part ownership of a company) to the 
public in order to obtain the huge capital needed to open up large rubber 
plantations in Malaya.
In 1911, the Singapore Chamber of 
Commerce established a Rubber 
Association, which organised sales of 
rubber in Singapore and made it an 
international rubber market. Thus, 
rubber exports from Malaya rose from
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 128) ---
rubber exports from Malaya rose from 
104 tonnes in 1905 to 196,000 tonnes in 
1914. Over the next few years, Malaya 
overtook Brazil as the world’s biggest 
producer of rubber, with most of the 
rubber exported through Singapore.
 Raw rubber arriving at London Docks, c. 1930s  Loading rubber sheets onto a lorry for transport to a ship, c. 1940s
3
 4 Loading rubber sheets onto ships  
for shipment to other countriesUsing rubber sheets to  
manufacture various productsWho was  
HENRY RIDLEY?
?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 128) ---
HENRY RIDLEY?
?
Henry Nicholas Ridley (1855–1956) 
became the first Director of the 
Singapore Botanic Gardens in 1888. 
He is most well-known for inventing 
a technique for tapping rubber trees 
without damaging them, which 
extended the trees’ productivity and 
lifespan. Known as “Mad Ridley” or 
“Rubber Ridley” , he repeatedly tried 
to interest European and Chinese 
businessmen to cultivate rubber trees 
as an agricultural crop. His promotion 
of rubber coincided with the invention
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 128) ---
of rubber coincided with the invention 
of the pneumatic tyre for motor cars. 
In 1955, just before he passed away, the 
Institution of the Rubber Industry gave 
him its highest award, the Colwyn Medal.
119
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?16 Capital refers to money and possessions used to start a new business.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 129) ---
Great Depression
Events Leading to the Great Depression
In the early 1930s, Singapore’s trade and industries were hit by the Great Depression.17 Read the illustrated story 
below to find out more about this worldwide event.
In the early 1920s, companies in the United States were making 
huge profits and the prices of their shares rose. Thus, many 
people bought shares as a way to make quick money.
But by 1929, many companies were losing money as they were unable
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 129) ---
to sell their goods. As a result, some people decided to sell their shares. 
This caused share prices to fall, which led more people to sell their shares.
Those who had borrowed money to buy 
shares had to sell their belongings to pay 
the banks what they owed. Many tried to 
withdraw their savings, but some banks 
did not have the money to pay them and 
were forced to close down. As a result, 
many people lost their life savings.On 24 October 1929, share prices decreased rapidly. This led
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 129) ---
to the collapse of the New York Stock Exchange located on 
Wall Street. This became known as the Wall Street Crash.Events leading to the GREAT DEPRESSIONEvents leading to the GREAT DEPRESSION
120
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)17 A depression is a time when there is a great decrease in business activities with many people losing their jobs. The Great 
Depression was so named because of the impact it had on many countries around the world.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 130) ---
With the economic hardship, 
spending on goods fell drastically.
The Great Depression was not confined to the United States and had 
an impact on countries that traded with it. Singapore was affected as 
the demand for certain commodities, including tin and rubber, dropped.As companies in the United States were no 
longer making huge profits, they had to cut the 
wages of workers. Many were also laid off and 
unemployment rose.
121
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 130) ---
unemployment rose.
121
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 131) ---
Impact of the Great Depression on Singapore
Singapore was hit particularly hard as its economy depended largely on 
overseas trade, especially the export of Malayan tin and rubber to the 
United States market. Prior to the Great Depression, prices of tin and 
rubber were very high. As a result, too much tin and rubber was produced. 
With the economic depression, the prices of tin and rubber fell drastically 
as the companies that used them closed down. For instance, the price of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 131) ---
rubber fell from an average of 34 cents in 1929 to 4.95 cents in June 1932.
The Great Depression worsened the lives of people in different communities 
in Singapore. Companies suffered losses and had to cut expenses by 
retrenching workers. Many businessmen lost their wealth or became 
bankrupt. There was thus widespread unemployment and hardship.
Who were most affected by the Great Depression? How did people cope? 
Read Source 4 to find out more about the impact of the Great Depression
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 131) ---
on the people in Singapore.
Life in Singapore during the Depression was considerably varied. Estate workers, clerks and labourers in the international 
economy suffered more than those in the local economy, such as government employees. Although they were a minority, 
people with stable employment experienced a low cost of living in the early 1930s. Those who took up work as hawkers, 
farmers or tutors could get by if they could survive the increased competition.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 131) ---
At the individual level, self-reliance, mutual help and family bonds helped people find work or obtain living expenses, food 
and lodging from family members and friends. The slump was difficult for large families with young and old dependents, 
while life was also painful for sinkehs with few local contacts and lone elderly persons, but their numbers were small due 
to emigration. More established families with members of working age could usually make ends meet.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 131) ---
– Adapted from an account by Singaporean historian Loh Kah Seng describing  
the impact of the Great Depression on people in Singapore, published in 2006SOURCE 4
 Rubber export coupon, c. 1930s. In order  
to protect the rubber industry during the  
Great Depression, the British imposed  
a restriction on the export of rubber by  
issuing coupons which gave the owners  
the right to export a certain percentage  
of their total rubber production.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 131) ---
of their total rubber production.
1. Based on Source 4, why were some people less affected during the Great Depression than others?LEARN ON THE GO
Go deeper into the  
impact of the  
Great Depression  
on Singapore @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc302 .
122
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 132) ---
It became increasingly difficult for people to find 
jobs. Whenever there was a job vacancy, hundreds 
would apply for it. Even the government had to 
cut the number of its workers and reduce the pay 
of those who remained.
Many of the unemployed had to depend on 
their friends or relatives. Many migrants had to 
return to their homelands when their friends and 
relatives could no longer support them.
To improve the economic situation, the 
government passed a series of laws from 1928
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 132) ---
government passed a series of laws from 1928 
to restrict and reduce the number of migrants 
entering Singapore, especially unskilled male 
Chinese labourers. The number of Chinese 
migrants dropped from 242,000 in 1930 to less 
than 28,000 in 1933. The government also arranged 
for large numbers of unemployed Chinese and 
Indians to return to their homelands.
By 1934, business conditions in the United States 
and other countries had improved, so exports 
from Singapore began to increase again.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 132) ---
from Singapore began to increase again.
 Landing permit of a Chinese migrant, 1934 In 1933, a new law was introduced which required new migrants to pay a fee of $5 
to obtain a landing permit (left), which had to be exchanged for a Certificate of  
Admission a month later. An example of a Certificate of Admission for Chinese 
migrants is on the right.
123
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 133) ---
View of the Singapore River where traders and ships first came to Singapore to trade, c. 1920sConclusion
By 1942, Singapore had grown into a busy port city with considerable trading 
networks. Trade was at an all-time high. This was due to a combination of 
reasons. One was the policies implemented by the British, which provided 
the peace and stability necessary for trade to flourish. For example, the 
British expanded and modernised port facilities, which enabled Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 133) ---
to handle the increasing volume of trade. External developments, such as 
the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 and the expansion of the tin and 
rubber industries in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, also facilitated 
Singapore’s growth.
The migrants, who had come in droves since Singapore’s founding in 1819, 
played a crucial part in helping to develop Singapore as a port city. They 
provided not only trading expertise but also the labour required to build
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 133) ---
up Singapore and its networks of trade. In the following chapter, we will 
look more closely at the contributions of various groups of people who 
came to live and work in Singapore.
124
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 134) ---
Postcard showing Boat Quay on the left and Empress Place buildings (present-day Asian Civilisations Museum) on the right, 1920s
125
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 135) ---
Look at the picture on the right. It shows present-day 
Boat Quay, which is a popular entertainment spot 
in Singapore. Has it always been like this? What has 
changed? What has remained the same?
When historians study the past, they use change and 
continuity to describe or compare developments 
in societies across time. Understanding change and 
continuity helps students of history recognise that 
change occurs in different ways (e.g., in terms of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 135) ---
economic activities and technology) and at different 
paces (e.g., gradual, slow and fast). When things 
remain the same, historians usually refer to them as 
having some form of continuity. Change and continuity 
can also exist together. The images below show how 
Boat Quay, where the Old Harbour was located, has 
developed over the years. 
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CHANGE AND CONTINUITY
1840s 1860s 1880s
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
126
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 136) ---
Now that you have learnt about 
Singapore’s development from 
1819 to 1942, what do you think 
are the types of changes that have 
taken place? Was there anything 
that you noticed that stayed the 
same throughout this period of 
time in Singapore?
 Present-day Boat Quay
1907 1967 Early 20th centuryLEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how historians 
understand change  
and continuity @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc303.
127
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 136) ---
and continuity @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc303.
127
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 137) ---
Use the table below to summarise what you have just learnt about how British rule and external developments 
helped Singapore to grow as a port city between 1819 and 1942.
How Did Singapore Grow as a Port City?
British Rule
You may consider how 
British rule helped to 
develop Singapore as a port 
city in the following areas:
• free port status
• administrative changes
• law and order
• education
• healthcare
• facilities
External Developments
You may consider how 
the following external
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 137) ---
You may consider how 
the following external 
developments impacted 
Singapore as a port city:  
• opening of the Suez 
Canal
• growth of the tin and 
rubber industries
• Great DepressionLET’S REVIEW
128
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 138) ---
Prior to Singapore’s transfer to the Colonial Office in 1867, one of the problems faced by the government 
was maintaining law and order. Read the following sources to find out what some of these challenges were.
SOURCE AWhy was law and order difficult to maintain in 19th-century Singapore?
YearsNumber of People  
Living in SingaporeNumber of Police Officers  
in Singapore
1830s 16,634 18
1840s 52,891 133
1860s 81,734 385
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 138) ---
1830s 16,634 18
1840s 52,891 133
1860s 81,734 385
The secret societies were used by the Chinese to maintain control within their community. It was also a way to regulate 
the contact between the Chinese masses and the British administration. As a result, the Singapore authorities also found 
themselves making use of the secret societies as an instrument of government. This was because from 1826 to 1877, 
there was no government institution to deal directly with the Chinese population.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 138) ---
– Adapted from an account by British anthropologist Maurice Freedman  
of the Chinese community in 19th-century Singapore, published in 1960SOURCE BCASE INVESTIGATION
 Table showing the number of police officers in Singapore in relation to the total number of people living there (1830s–1860s). The numbers in this table  
are estimated.
129
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 139) ---
The Chinese who arrived in the Straits Settlements come from different provinces. The people of each province grouped 
together and formed a secret society. The aim of these secret societies is to offer mutual protection, but they are often 
used to commit crimes. These groups hinder the administration of justice in the law courts of the Straits Settlements.
– Adapted from an account of 19th-century Singapore by John Cameron,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 139) ---
owner and editor of The Straits Times from 1861 to 1881, published in 1865SOURCE C
Weak government, lack of finance, secret society power, and migrants who did not stay long made early Singapore a 
violent place. The hundreds of Chinese who lived on the isolated pepper and gambier farms in the countryside were 
beyond the reach of government. The authorities did not exert much control in the countryside. Even the town was unsafe.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 139) ---
The main danger came from gang robberies, which were reputed to be the work of Chinese secret societies. Gangs of up 
to 200 Chinese raided parts of the town almost every night in the early 1840s. Their chief targets were the Malay districts, 
but they sometimes attacked Indians and Europeans too. The whole town lived in fear, and the tiny police force kept out 
of the way until the gangsters had gone.
– Adapted from an account by British historian Constance Mary Turnbull
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 139) ---
of life in Singapore in the early 1840s, published in 2009SOURCE D
The government not only showed an ignorance of Chinese dialects but also had an unconcerned attitude towards 
governing Singapore. During the period of the East India Company’s rule in the Straits Settlements, the primary concern 
of the Straits Settlements government was to increase the importance of Singapore as a trading post.
– Adapted from an account by Singaporean historian Eunice Thio of the role played
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 139) ---
by the government in early 19th-century Singapore, published in 1960SOURCE E
130
SINGAPORE'S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 140) ---
1. Study Source A. What do the figures suggest about the difficulties/challenges faced in maintaining law 
and order in Singapore before 1867?
2. Read Source B. How did the British government deal with secret societies from 1826 to 1877?
3. Read Source C. What did secret societies do to “hinder the administration of justice”?
4. Read Source D. Why was early Singapore “a violent place”?
5. Read Source E. What did the government in Singapore focus on during the period of the East India
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 140) ---
Company rule?
After reading the sources, note down the key points for the government’s difficulty in maintaining law and 
order in 19th-century Singapore in the table below. An example has been done for you.INVESTIGATE!
REPORT!
Why Was Law and Order Difficult to Establish in 19th-Century Singapore?
Key Point Supporting Evidence from Source(s)
The government at that time had other priorities, 
such as developing Singapore’s trade, compared to 
maintaining law and order.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 140) ---
maintaining law and order.
Source E says that “the primary concern of the 
Straits Settlements government was to increase the 
importance of Singapore as a trading post”.
Using the points you have written down, what do you think were the key reasons for the government’s 
difficulties in maintaining law and order in 19th-century Singapore?
131
HOW DID BRITISH RULE AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AFFECT SINGAPORE’S GROWTH AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 142) ---
Samsui women working at a construction site, late 1930s
133
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?In Chapter 3, you learnt about the role of the British and external events  
in Singapore’s development as a port city. However, the new settlement 
also thrived because of the migrants who came from the region and beyond 
to live and work in Singapore. In this chapter, you will find out more about
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 142) ---
the migrants’ contributions to the economy, education, healthcare and 
law-making that helped Singapore grow as a port city.CHAPTER  
4
What Role Did the People in Singapore  
Play in Its Development as a Port City  
from 1819 to 1942?
You will learn:
• Who the different groups of 
people coming to Singapore 
from 1819 to 1942 were
• Why the migrants came
• How they helped develop 
Singapore into a port city
Chapter at a Glance
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 143) ---
The first convict 
labourers from 
India arrive in 
Singapore.The East India Company 
(EIC) forms the Straits 
Settlements by grouping 
Penang, Melaka and 
Singapore together.
Chinese Girls’ School, later 
renamed the Church of 
England Zenana Missionary 
Society (CEZMS) School is 
founded. This school would 
eventually be known as  
St Margaret’s School.Tan Tock Seng establishes 
a paupers’ hospital 
(hospital for the poor) on 
Pearl’s Hill. This hospital 
would later be known as
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 143) ---
would later be known as  
Tan Tock Seng Hospital.Singapore Institution is founded. 
It later becomes the Singapore 
Institution Free School, which 
offers classes in English, Chinese 
and Malay at the primary level. 
This school would eventually be 
known as Raffles Institution.Beyond Singapore In Singapore
 Raffles Institution at its first  
site on Bras Basah Road, 1890s Pupils at the CEZMS School, c. 1850s  Painting by John Turnbull Thomson 
showing the Chinese Pauper Hospital
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 143) ---
showing the Chinese Pauper Hospital  
on Pearl’s Hill, 18481826 1825 1842 1823 1844Timeline
134
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 144) ---
Thong Chai Medical Institution 
is set up.The Chinese High School 
is founded. This school 
would later be known as 
Hwa Chong Institution.The EIC is dissolved.  
The territories under 
its rule come under  
the direct control of 
the British government. 
 Doctor tending to a patient at 
Thong Chai Medical Institution, 
1890s Alsagoff Arab School, 1950s  The Chinese High School on 
Bukit Timah Road, 1930s. The 
clock tower has been preserved 
as a national monument.Wall Street Crash in the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 144) ---
as a national monument.Wall Street Crash in the 
United States; start of 
the Great Depression
Japanese troops 
invade Singapore.
The Alsagoff Arab School 
is founded. Students are 
taught Arabic language 
and Islamic knowledge as 
well as reading and writing 
in English and Malay.1942
 Impoverished family  
in the US, 1936
1858 1867 1912 1929 1919
135
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 145) ---
Who Were the Migrants?
Within a few years of Singapore’s founding, people were flocking to it.  
Figure 4.1 below shows the population growth from 1824 to 1901. These 
figures reflect the population of both locals and migrants. What trends do 
you observe? Where did these groups of migrants come from? 
136
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942) Figure 4.1: Bar graph showing the population growth in Singapore from 1824 to 1901. The population
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 145) ---
figures have been rounded to the nearest thousand.
FROM EUROPE
Most of the Europeans in 
Singapore were British. 
Other Europeans included  
the Dutch, French, 
Germans, Portuguese 
and Swiss.Take a look at Figure 4.2 and Map 4.1 
to find out who these migrants were 
and where they came from.
20406080100120140160180200220240
0
Population Figures from the Census Report, 1891
People Sub-Group (If Any) Numbers
Europeans and Americans 5,254
Eurasians 3,589
Chinese• Cantonese
• Hokkiens
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 145) ---
Eurasians 3,589
Chinese• Cantonese
• Hokkiens
• Hylams (Hainanese)
• Khehs (Hakkas)
• Straits-born Chinese (Chinese Peranakans)
• Teochews23,397
45,856
8,711
7,402
12,805
23,737
Native Groups of the 
Malay Archipelago• Achehnese
• Baweanese (Boyanese)
• Bugis
• Dyaks (Dayaks)
• Javanese
• Jawi Pekans (Jawi Peranakans)
• Malays
• Manilamen (present-day Filipinos)2
2,677
1,639
96
8,541
302
22,701
34
Native Groups of the 
Colonial Territories 
of British India• Bengalis and other natives
• Parsees
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 145) ---
• Parsees
• Tamils3,452
54
12,503
Other Groups• Africans
• Annamese (present-day Vietnamese)
• Arabs
• Armenians
• Burmese
• Japanese
• Jews
• Persians (present-day Iranians)
• Siamese (present-day Thais)
• Sinhalese (present-day Sri Lankans)13
32
806
68
26
287
190
9
211
159Population (thousands)
 Figure 4.2: Population figures adapted from  
the Census Report, 18911824 1830 1840 1849 1860 1871 1881 1891 1901
Year11,00017,00035,00053,00082,00096,000138,000185,000227,000
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 146) ---
As you can see, migrants came to Singapore from different parts of  
the world. Let us find out why they did so.
137
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
FROM ARABIA
The Arabs came 
mainly from 
Hadhramaut in 
southern Arabia 
(southeastern 
part of present-
day Yemen). Many 
came as traders.
FROM INDIA AND CEYLON
Most of the people from India 
who came to Singapore were 
Tamils from Madras (present-
day Chennai) and Nagapattinam.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 146) ---
day Chennai) and Nagapattinam. 
There were also Tamils and 
Sinhalese from Ceylon (present-
day Sri Lanka). The migrants 
from northern India comprised 
Punjabis and Sikhs from Punjab, 
Bengalis from Bengal, Gujaratis 
from Gujarat and Parsees from 
Bombay (present-day Mumbai).
FROM CHINA
Most of the Chinese who arrived in 
Singapore came from the southern 
provinces of China. The Hokkiens came 
from Fujian; the Cantonese, Teochews 
and Hakkas from Guangdong; and the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 146) ---
and Hakkas from Guangdong; and the 
Hainanese from Hainan Island.
FROM THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO
The Malays who came to 
Singapore were from the Malay 
Peninsula, Sumatra, Java and 
Celebes (present-day Sulawesi). 
The Javanese, Baweanese (from 
Bawean Island) and Bugis (from 
Celebes) also came to Singapore. 
In addition, there were groups 
such as the Eurasians, the Straits-
born Chinese (also known as 
Chinese Peranakans) and the Jawi 
Peranakans. The Eurasians were
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 146) ---
Peranakans. The Eurasians were 
of mixed Asian and Portuguese, 
Dutch or British descent, and were 
mostly from Melaka; the Chinese 
Peranakans were of mixed Chinese 
and Malay descent; and the Jawi 
Peranakans of mixed Indian-Muslim 
and Malay descent. Map 4.1: Map showing the places of origin  
of various migrants who came to Singapore  
in the 19th century
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 147) ---
Why Did Migrants Come to 
Singapore After 1819?
Just as it is today, it was not easy for people in the past to leave their 
homelands and start anew in a foreign land far away. Not only did the 
migrants have to brave the dangers of long-distance travel, such as 
shipwrecks and disease, they also faced much uncertainty about the future 
in the lands where they eventually settled. Thus, for migrants to come to  
Singapore after 1819, they had to have strong reasons for leaving their
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 147) ---
homelands, and Singapore must have had qualities which drew them here.
Push Factors
Push factors refer to unfavourable circumstances that motivate people to 
settle elsewhere. Many of the migrants left their homelands because of 
the poor living conditions. Some experienced hunger and poverty while 
others feared for their lives. These problems were often brought about by 
overpopulation, natural disasters or conflict. For example, many in China,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 147) ---
India and Southeast Asia were affected by the unrest and instability caused 
by wars, rebellions and lawlessness in the 19th and early 20th centuries.  
The people worried about their families’ and their own safety. It also 
became difficult for them to earn a livelihood. As a result, they left to 
seek more peaceful and prosperous lives elsewhere.
Pull Factors
Pull factors are the favourable conditions that attract people to move to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 147) ---
a new place. While push factors made people leave their homelands, pull 
factors attracted them to find work in Singapore. The major pull factors 
in the 19th and 20th centuries were trade and business opportunities, and 
better job prospects. 
 Illustration by Vincent Brooks from a British 
newspaper in October 1877 showing both humans  
and animals affected by famine in India
 Illustration showing a view of the town of 
Singapore and the Singapore River from  
Fort Canning Hill, 1865
138
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 147) ---
Fort Canning Hill, 1865
138
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 148) ---
The many trading and business opportunities available in Singapore 
attracted people from Europe, India, China and neighbouring countries.
With its excellent geographical location, Singapore served as a convenient 
meeting point for traders from many parts of the world stopping to 
replenish their fuel and food supplies. Taking advantage of its good 
location and trading networks, numerous traders came to Singapore for 
the many diverse goods that could be found and traded. By exchanging
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 148) ---
or selling their goods and buying local products, they were able to obtain 
what they needed and return home. 
Singapore’s free port status meant that traders did not have to pay taxes 
on trade. This enabled them to make larger profits in Singapore than in 
other ports in the region.
Singapore’s free immigration policy allowed migrants to come and go as 
they pleased. They were not required to pay for immigrant passes and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 148) ---
papers or apply for permission to enter and leave Singapore. This made it 
easier for people from China, India and the surrounding regions to come 
to Singapore. It also meant that traders could come as often as they liked 
for trade and business.
Another major pull factor was the availability of better job prospects. 
Different types of jobs were available because the British needed to 
develop roads, bridges and other infrastructure1 to support the increase
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 148) ---
in port activities and provide for the growing population who had started 
coming in increasing numbers since Singapore’s founding.
Singapore was also an attractive option for the poorer migrants because 
they could receive higher wages than what they received back home. Since 
they could come and go freely because of the free immigration policy, 
many did not see Singapore as a permanent home and planned to return 
to their homelands after earning enough money.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 148) ---
to their homelands after earning enough money. 
 Cavenagh Bridge, c. 1890, as seen from the southern bank of the Singapore River. 
The bridge was opened in 1869 to link the Civic District on the northern bank of the 
Singapore River to Commercial Square (present-day Raffles Place) on the southern bank. Labourers at work on a street in Chinatown, early 20th century
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
why people came to 
colonial Singapore @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc401.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 148) ---
colonial Singapore @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc401.
1 Infrastructure refers to the basic facilities, systems and structures that are required for a place to function, such as 
water pipes, roads and sewage drains.
139
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 149) ---
When historians study the past, they need to look at various experiences 
faced by different people. This is because people may have different 
experiences even if they live in the same place during the same time. 
Studying similarities and differences in people’s experiences helps 
historians develop a more complete understanding of the past.
People’s experiences could be influenced by their occupations. 
Consider the entrepreneurs,2 labourers and craftsmen in Singapore in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 149) ---
the 19th and early 20th centuries. How would their work have shaped 
their experiences? How similar or different would their lives have been?
2 An entrepreneur is a person who sets up a business, taking on financial risks in the hope of making a profit.
3 A commission refers to the fee for the service of selling a good. It is usually a percentage of the cost of the good.
What Were the Occupations of  
the Different Groups of Migrants?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 149) ---
the Different Groups of Migrants?
Upon arriving in Singapore, one of the first concerns for the migrants was 
to secure their livelihoods to survive in Singapore. The hope of earning and 
saving enough to return in prosperity to their homelands was also on their 
minds. In fact, many migrants simply took up the same trade or occupation 
they had before coming to Singapore. Others, such as the coolies, had 
signed contracts to take up a job even before they left home. Regardless
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 149) ---
of where they came from, Singapore offered an opportunity for migrants 
to improve their lives. Hand-coloured print of Edwin Augustus Porcher’s 
painting of Singapore River with Thomson Bridge 
(later replaced by an iron bridge named Elgin 
Bridge), 1851BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: DIVERSITY
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
LEARN ON THE GO
Explore the 
diversity of people’s 
experiences in 
colonial Singapore @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc402 .
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 149) ---
colonial Singapore @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc402 .
2 An entrepreneur is a person who sets up a business, taking on financial risks in the hope of making a profit.
140
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 150) ---
Sculpture of Alexander Laurie Johnston by  
Aw Tee Hong located at Maybank Tower in Raffles 
Place, the site of Johnston’s former warehouse  Edward Boustead’s warehouse is the large building 
on the left of this 1847 watercolour sketch by 
Charles Dyce.
 Edward Boustead
Entrepreneurs
Traders
When Singapore was founded, the first group of people who came were 
the traders. Many traders were attracted by the favourable trade policies.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 150) ---
These traders engaged in commercial activities along the Singapore River. 
Boat Quay became the busiest part of the river, with many shophouses 
and warehouses lining the riverbank.
Some Europeans also set up agency houses3 here. In return for their services, 
they received a commission.4 Some of these agency houses include A. L. 
Johnston & Company (established in 1820 by Alexander Laurie Johnston)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 150) ---
and Boustead & Company (established in 1828 by Edward Boustead).Upon his death in 1888, Boustead left  
a sum of money to construct a building 
for sailors living in Singapore. The 
building, named after Boustead, was 
opened in 1892 by the Governor of the 
Straits Settlements. In the late 1970s, 
it was demolished for port expansion 
works. DID YOU KNOW?
 Boustead Institute on Anson Road,  
early 20th century
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 150) ---
early 20th century
3 Agency houses were companies that helped European manufacturers to sell their goods, such as opium and tea, to other 
traders in exchange for goods from Southeast Asia, such as spices and birds’ nests. 
4 A commission refers to the fee for the service of selling a good. It is usually a percentage of the cost of the good.
141
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 151) ---
The Europeans who set up the agency houses often had difficulty dealing 
with Asian traders because of their differences in language. Thus, the 
Chinese Peranakans, who could speak English, Malay and Chinese dialects, 
played a significant role in facilitating communication between the 
European and Asian traders.
Several Chinese Peranakans even set up their own trading businesses  
in Singapore. Among them was Melakan-born Tan Kim Seng, who became
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 151) ---
one of the most well-known members of the Chinese community during 
the colonial period.
Apart from the European agency houses and Chinese traders, many 
traders from various parts of the Malay Archipelago were also attracted 
by Singapore’s free port status. One trader who arrived in the 1800s was 
Melakan-born Hajjah Fatimah Sulaiman. Having lost her husband at a young 
age, she continued and expanded his business in Singapore, gaining great 
wealth in the process.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 151) ---
wealth in the process.
Yet another trader who came shortly after Singapore’s founding was 
Naraina Pillai. He was an Indian trader from Penang who started a factory 
in Singapore to produce bricks. He also had a cotton cloth business, which 
later grew to become one of the largest in Singapore. Other Indian traders, 
particularly from Penang, soon followed. By the early 1870s, there were 
substantial numbers of Indian traders, including Wassiamull Assomull. He
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 151) ---
was a textile trader with extensive trading connections outside of India 
and became very prosperous by the end of the 19th century. 
 Tan Kim Seng This silver epergne (ornamental table centrepiece) 
carries the following inscription: “... to Tan Kim 
Seng and Tan Beng Swee [son of Tan Kim Seng] of 
Singapore as a mark of esteem and friendship, and in 
acknowledgement of the many and valuable services 
rendered to himself personally as well as to his firm
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 151) ---
(Boustead & Co. of Singapore) ..., January 1862.”
Hajjah Fatimah Sulaiman was formally 
admitted to the Singapore Women’s 
Hall of Fame in 2005 for her many 
contributions to Singapore.DID YOU KNOW?
 Hajjah Fatimah Mosque, completed in 1846
 In 1827, Naraina Pillai established Singapore’s 
oldest Hindu temple, the Sri Mariamman Temple 
on South Bridge Road. This picture was taken 
around 1905.
142
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 152) ---
The Bugis were also attracted by Singapore’s free port status. They had 
been trading in the region long before the Europeans arrived. However, 
after the Dutch took control of the East Indies and its trade routes, they 
imposed taxes on traders. This affected the spice trade of the Bugis, who 
traditionally used these trade routes. When Singapore became a free port, 
it thus attracted vast numbers of Bugis ships. By the beginning of the 20th
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 152) ---
century, several hundred Bugis traders and their families had moved to 
Singapore. One of the most prominent Bugis traders was Haji Omar Ali, who 
arrived in Singapore from the Dutch East Indies in 1880 and subsequently 
owned many properties in Singapore. His youngest son, Haji Ambo Sooloh, 
expanded his father’s business and later became one of the founders of 
the Malay newspaper Utusan Melayu (Malay Messenger) in 1939.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 152) ---
Kampong Bugis, one of the places where the Bugis settled after they landed in Singapore, c. 1890sWho were  
THE BUGIS?
?
The Bugis were among the first few 
groups of people to arrive in Singapore 
in 1819. They originally came from 
the southwestern peninsula of Celebes 
(present-day Sulawesi in Indonesia). 
The Bugis were an important seafaring 
people in Southeast Asia who were 
well known for their maritime trading 
and boatbuilding skills. When they
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 152) ---
and boatbuilding skills. When they 
first landed in Singapore, they settled 
in Kampong Glam, Kampong Bugis 
and later Kampong Rochor (the area 
around present-day Lavender MRT 
station). Landmarks such as Bugis 
Street and Bugis MRT station are 
reminders of the Bugis’ links to these 
areas.
 Bugis sailor aboard his ship, 1950s
143
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 153) ---
Syed Omar bin Ali Aljunied donated 
one of his many plots of land for the 
building of St Andrew’s Church (now 
known as St Andrew’s Cathedral) in 
1823. Later, he also donated land to  
Tan Tock Seng in 1844 for the 
construction of a hospital for the  
poor, known as Tan Tock Seng 
Hospital today.DID YOU KNOW?
The presence of the Bugis in Singapore in turn attracted Arab and Indian 
traders from the Middle East and India. This was due to the Bugis’ close ties
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 153) ---
with the Arab and Indian trade networks in Southeast Asia. 
The Arabs were also attracted to Singapore as a commercial entrepôt. 
Many of the Arabs in Southeast Asia originated from Hadhramaut  
in southern Arabia. They had been active traders in Southeast Asia since 
the 7th century. 
Among the first Arab traders to arrive in Singapore shortly after its 
founding were Syed Omar bin Ali Aljunied and his uncle, Syed Mohammed 
bin Harun (Haroon) Aljunied, two wealthy Hadhrami Arabs from Sumatra.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 153) ---
They were soon followed by numerous others who set sail from parts of 
Malaya, Sumatra and Java.
In the latter part of the 19th century, another wave of Arabs came from 
Hadhramaut to Singapore. This included the Alkaff brothers, Ahmad and 
Abdul, who established their company, Alkaff & Company, in the 1860s. 
This was partly due to the increased use of steamships and the opening 
of the Suez Canal in 1869 (see Chapter 3), which made the journey easier.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 153) ---
Records show that in the 1880s, there were as many as 800 Arabs living 
in Singapore, mainly concentrated in the area around Arab, Baghdad, 
Bussorah, Jeddah and Muscat Streets. By the 1930s, the Arab community 
had become one of the largest property owners in Singapore, with  
an estimated 80 per cent of the Arabs’ primary income coming from rent.
 The Alkaff Arcade, the first indoor shopping centre in Singapore when it opened in 1909, at
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 153) ---
Raffles Place, c. 1920s. The Alkaff family owned many properties along the Singapore River 
and was one of the wealthiest families in colonial Singapore. Sultan Mosque, located at the corner of Arab Street  
 and North Bridge Road, c. 1930
144
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 154) ---
Street Traders
Another group of traders were street traders. There were many different 
types of street traders. Food traders, who sold quick and cheap meals to 
the coolies and other workers, formed the largest group. There were also 
small-scale farmers, fishermen and hunters who sold food products they 
had grown or caught in the streets and markets. Yet another group of street 
traders sold items such as sandals, brooms and towels, while street barbers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 154) ---
and cobblers, who provided haircutting and shoe-mending services to the 
community, made up the last group of street traders.
 Indian bread seller, c. 1910s
 Chettiar moneylender, c. 1890 Malay satay seller, 1900s  Chinese street traders, c. 1920s
Moneylenders
As Singapore grew as an entrepôt, it attracted Indians skilled in trade, 
accounting, banking and credit. These skills were in high demand due to 
the commercial activities carried out in the port city.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 154) ---
One particularly influential group was the Chettiars, or Indian  
moneylenders. They arrived from the 1820s onwards and 
operated in the Singapore River area. Different groups of traders 
would borrow money from these moneylenders as very few 
banks would lend them money. In this way, the Chettiars 
contributed to Singapore’s commercial importance.
145
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 155) ---
Labourers
Male Coolies
Labourers, or coolies, made up a large group of the migrants. Many 
were Chinese men who came to Singapore in the latter half of  
the 19th century. They provided much-needed labour as workers were 
needed to load and unload goods at the ports, and carry goods to and 
from boats and warehouses situated along the Singapore River. There were 
also large numbers of Indian labourers recruited to the Straits Settlements,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 155) ---
especially from 1867 to 1941, to help in the development of the port city. 
These labourers worked at the various plantations in Singapore and Malaya, 
and helped to build roads, railways and harbour facilities.
Coolies were also heavily involved in coaling, or the loading of coal onto 
steamships, which was a messy and tiring job. This was an essential service 
required by major shipping companies. The coolies’ hard work helped 
Singapore gain a reputation for efficiency.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 155) ---
Singapore gain a reputation for efficiency. 
As trade grew, more coolies were brought in. In addition to their work 
at the ports, they were employed in construction work while others 
cleared land for plantations. Some became rickshaw pullers, who played 
an important role in providing an inexpensive means of transport for a 
wide range of people, such as European businessmen, local street traders 
and even school-going children.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 155) ---
and even school-going children. 
 Chinese migrant workers at a rubber plantation, late 19th century. 
The original photograph was in black and white. Colour has been 
added to it digitally in recent times to enhance its effect.
Indian labourers repairing a road in Singapore, c. 1910 A European man, his servant and a rickshaw 
puller, c. 1890s
Life as a rickshaw puller was very 
tough. The job was physically 
demanding as each coolie had to carry 
a few hundred kilograms of weight
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 155) ---
a few hundred kilograms of weight 
every day to various parts of the city. 
Rickshaw pullers also faced occasional 
danger as some were stabbed or beaten 
to death for either moving too slowly 
or protesting over the underpayment 
of the agreed fees for the rickshaw ride. 
For a day’s work, each rickshaw  
puller earned around 30 to 40 cents.  
To make ends meet, many had to take 
on additional jobs either as labourers 
or shop workers.DID YOU KNOW?
146
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 155) ---
or shop workers.DID YOU KNOW?
146
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 156) ---
The Samsui women wore red 
headdresses as they were eye-catching 
and reduced the chances of accidents 
occurring at construction sites. These 
headdresses also protected their hair 
from dust and dirt. In addition, the 
women used discarded rubber tyres to 
make sandals that protected their feet 
when they worked at the construction 
sites.DID YOU KNOW?
 Samsui Women
Manual labour was borne not only by the men. From the 1930s onwards,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 156) ---
it was common to see women in bright red headdresses and dark clothes 
on construction sites. The work they did was physically demanding. For 
example, they had to balance heavy pails of cement on the two ends of a 
stick slung across their shoulders. These female labourers were known as 
Samsui women because many came from the Sanshui (Samsui in Cantonese) 
district in Guangdong province, China (see Map 4.2). 
 Samsui woman working in a construction yard,  
late 1930s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 156) ---
late 1930s
INDIAN OCEANSouth China Sea
GuangdongSanshui
 Building Site / Samsui Women by Liu Kang, 1951
CHINA
Singapore
147
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942? Map 4.2: Map showing the location of Sanshui, where many of the Samsui women originatedN
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 157) ---
Convict Labourers
From 1825 to 1873, the main source of labour for public works in Singapore 
was Indian convicts brought over by the British. 
Due to the scarcity of labour in the new colony, there was plenty of work 
for the convicts. They were tasked to clear jungles, sweep the streets, 
lay the earliest roads, tend the town’s gardens and parks, and construct 
buildings.
Some notable roads and buildings constructed by Indian convict labourers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 157) ---
include High Street, the first street in Singapore, and many of the important 
government buildings there. The nearby St Andrew’s Church (now known 
as St Andrew’s Cathedral) was also built by convict labourers trained  
in construction work.
Indian convicts who came to Singapore 
were divided into six different classes. 
For example, there was a small group 
of convicts (male and female) who 
were employed in hospitals and public 
offices. Some of these convicts brought
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 157) ---
offices. Some of these convicts brought 
with them specialist knowledge.  
For example, Bawajee Rajaram from 
Bombay (present-day Mumbai) drew 
plans for public buildings such as the 
St Andrew’s Cathedral. Convicts were 
also engaged in varied tasks from 
making bricks to taking photographs 
of their fellow inmates.DID YOU KNOW?
 Part of the convict jail located between Bras Basah and Stamford Roads, c. 1870 Bricks from an archaeological excavation at
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 157) ---
the Cathedral of Good Shepherd in 2013. The 
excavation showed the remains of what might 
have been originally part of the convict jail 
located on Bras Basah Road.
 Indian convict labourers, 1870s
148
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
What do you think 
happened to these convict 
labourers after they had 
completed their work  
in Singapore?Think!
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 158) ---
Craftsmen
Boatmakers
Some communities, such as the Bugis, were engaged in boatmaking.  
The Bugis were skilled in building ships and boats that Malay traders used 
to ferry goods to neighbouring islands. They thus established a thriving 
shipbuilding industry and Bugis trading vessels, such as the phinisi (sailing 
ships), could be found transporting goods along the Singapore River.
 Artist’s impression of a fleet of Bugis phinisi.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 158) ---
These ships were small but fast on water. Modern-day picture showing the construction of 
the frame of a Bugis phinisi Scaled replica of a Bugis phinisi on display at the 
Malay Heritage Centre
149
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 159) ---
Now that you know what the various communities did in Singapore, what 
do you think life was like for them? Read the following sources to find out 
more about how they felt after arriving in Singapore in the 19th and early 
20th centuries.
On my first day of arrival in Singapore as a child, I felt like I was a fish out of water.* Everything was new to me. I couldn’t 
understand people who talked to me because they sounded different. They were all speaking with a different accent,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 159) ---
which was different from mine. The people living here also spoke a mixture of Malay words with their own languages.  
I could not understand what they were saying. I could not understand sentences such as “ Lu suka ki pasar bo?”.†
The people here were so different. Among the Chinese, there were people from different provinces who spoke different 
dialects that were completely different from mine, such as the Hainanese. Then there were also so many other races,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 159) ---
speaking languages I had never heard, and wearing different clothes. 
– Adapted from an account by Low Cheng Gin, whose family was forced by bandit attacks to leave  
his village in China in 1925. He had never left his village before coming to Singapore at the age of 10. 
* “A fish out of water” is a phrase indicating a person is away from his or her usual environment.
† The sentence is a mix of Hokkien and Malay, and means “Do you like to go to the market?”.SOURCE 1
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 159) ---
Singapore Traction Company (STC) trolley bus, 
1950s. Trolley buses, which replaced trams as  
the main mode of transport in Singapore in  
the late 1920s, were run mainly by the STC.SOURCE 2
It was very difficult to get a job in the early 1930s, unless you had a lot of experience and recommendations from 
friends. I got a job eventually only because one of my friends recommended me to the Singapore Traction Company.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 159) ---
Otherwise, I couldn’t get one because everywhere you went, you would see a “NO VACANCY” signboard. I was quite 
disappointed, you know. My uncle told me, “If you come to Singapore, you can easily get a job, you know.” But when  
I came here I could not find any jobs. 
– Adapted from an account by Palanivelu Natesan, who came to Singapore in June 1930 during the Great Depression.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 159) ---
Natesan eventually found work as a clerk with the Singapore Traction Company and later worked as a radio broadcasting assistant.
150
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 160) ---
Singapore is certainly the most convenient city I ever saw, as well planned and carefully executed as though built entirely 
by one man. It is like a big desk, full of drawers and pigeonholes, where everything has its place, and can always be found 
in it. For instance, around the Esplanade [present-day Padang], you find the European hotels; around Commercial Square 
[present-day Raffles Place] are all the shipping offices, warehouses, and shops of the European traders; and along Boat
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 160) ---
Quay are all the ship chandlers [people who deal in supplies and equipment for ships]. Nearby, you will find a dozen 
large Chinese medicine shops, cloth shops, tin shops, and shops kept by blacksmiths, tailors and carpenters. There are 
also people selling fruit, vegetables and grain. Owing to this peculiar grouping of the different trades, one can do more 
business in less time in Singapore than in any other town in the world.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 160) ---
– Adapted from an account by American zoologist William Temple Hornaday,  
who spent two years travelling around India, Sri Lanka, the Malay Peninsula, Singapore  
and Borneo collecting animal specimens. This account was taken from his book,  
Two Years in the Jungle, published in 1885, which was inspired by his travels.SOURCE 3
1. According to Sources 1, 2 and 3, what were the different experiences of the three men in Singapore? 
2. Why do you think their experiences were different?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 160) ---
Hotel de l’Europe at the Esplanade (present-day 
Padang), c. 1910s. This hotel was first built  
in the 1850s and later rebuilt in the 1910s.  
The hotel was then demolished in the 1930s to 
make way for the former Supreme Court building 
(today part of the National Gallery Singapore).
151
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 161) ---
When examining images, such as photographs or illustrations, study them in detail and search for clues 
within the images to help you understand what they are trying to show. Use the three-step process of  
See-Think-Wonder to guide you. Look at the steps below.
Here is an example of how the See-Think-Wonder process can be used to analyse an image.
Example
 Illustration of labourers 
working on a steamship, 
published in Illustrated 
London News, a weekly 
British newspaper,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 161) ---
London News, a weekly 
British newspaper,  
18 January 1873See:  
What do you see?Think:  
What do you  
think is going on?Wonder:  
What does it  
make you wonder?1 2 3Step Step StepLEARN A SKILL: ANALYSING IMAGES
What do you see?What do you think  
is going on?What does it make  
you wonder?
What details do you see in the image? What do you think might be going on 
in the image? (You may tap on your 
contextual knowledge about this topic.)What additional questions/thoughts do
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 161) ---
you have regarding this image?
I see …
• many labourers; 
• labourers working at night; 
• labourers working on a steamship; 
• a seated man with folded arms; 
• another seated man resting his chin 
on his hand; and
• the shadows of some of the 
labourers on the side of the ship.I think …
• the labourers worked in cramped 
conditions to deliver coal supplies to 
the steamship;
• the labourers were closely 
supervised to ensure that they 
completed the loading of coal 
supplies on time; and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 161) ---
supplies on time; and
• life for the labourers was difficult as 
they had to do back-breaking work.I wonder …
• why the labourers were working at 
night;
• how the labourers were paid for 
their labour; and
• if this image is representative of the 
lives of the labourers working in 
Singapore at the time.1 2 3
152
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 162) ---
Now, use the three-step process to analyse the following image. 
 Photograph of labourers at work on a street in Chinatown, c. 1900s
What do you see?What do you think  
is going on?What does it make  
you wonder?
What details do you see in the image? What do you think might be going on 
in the image? (You may tap on your 
contextual knowledge about this topic.)What additional questions/thoughts do 
you have regarding this image?
I see … I think … I wonder …1 2 3LEARN ON THE GO
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 162) ---
I see … I think … I wonder …1 2 3LEARN ON THE GO
Sharpen your image 
analysis skills @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc403.
153
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 163) ---
What Educational Opportunities 
and Healthcare Services Were 
Provided by the Migrants?
The promotion of trade was the main priority for the British authorities in 
Singapore. Thus, the welfare of the general population was not a primary 
focus of the British. Healthcare services and educational opportunities 
provided by the British were therefore inadequate to meet the needs 
of the people. In response, some migrants helped fund educational and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 163) ---
healthcare provisions for the larger community in Singapore.
Education
In Chapter 3, you learnt that the British only ran schools that supported 
their economic interests and to fill certain government positions. They 
provided few other educational opportunities even till the early part of 
the 20th century. Various people and organisations thus stepped in to fill 
the gap, establishing schools that benefitted their communities.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 163) ---
Prior to 1900, schools were largely intended for boys. There were very 
few schools for girls, except those run by Christian missions that took  
in orphaned and homeless girls. For example, Maria Dyer, an English 
missionary, started one of the earliest schools for such girls. Originally 
called Chinese Girls’ School, then later Church of England Zenana 
Missionary School (present-day St Margaret’s School), it began as a home
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 163) ---
for young Chinese girls rescued by the police before they could be sold 
off. Read Source 4 to find out more about it.
St Margaret’s School, Singapore’s oldest school for girls, was established in 1842 by missionary Maria Dyer. It began as 
a missionary effort to save mui tsai (“little sister” in Cantonese), or bonded domestic servants. In 1842, Maria and her 
husband, Samuel Dyer of the London Missionary Society, were transiting in Singapore on their way to do missionary work
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 163) ---
in China when Maria was moved by the plight of these girls. So she obtained permission to house these homeless girls 
and began the work of teaching these girls English, the Christian faith and home economics. It was the first school for girls 
in Singapore established in a time when the education of women was considered unimportant.
– Adapted from an online account of Singapore’s oldest school for girls SOURCE 4
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 163) ---
1. What motivated Maria Dyer to establish a school for girls in Singapore in the 1840s?
2. Why was the establishment of a school for girls unusual at this point of time in Singapore?
 Artist’s impression of Maria Dyer
154
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
Why was education in 
the past largely intended 
for boys only?Think!
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 164) ---
Students at the Chinese Free School on Amoy  
Street, c. 1905. The Chinese Free School was 
established in 1854 and funded by Tan Kim Seng.
 Gan Eng Seng
Wealthy Chinese traders also built schools to provide Chinese education 
in Singapore. Among them was Tan Kim Seng, who opened two Hokkien 
schools, one near Thian Hock Keng Temple in Telok Ayer Street and the 
other in Amoy Street.
Another Chinese trader, Gan Eng Seng, founded the Anglo-Chinese Free
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 164) ---
School (present-day Gan Eng Seng School) in 1885. At that time, it was 
the only school in Singapore that taught both Chinese and English. In 
the Chinese schools, the teachers would use dialects such as Hokkien, 
Cantonese and Teochew to teach students to recite passages from Chinese 
literature. Students also learnt to write letters and to use the abacus.
Other Chinese businessmen and organisations also started building schools
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 164) ---
in the 20th century. For example, in 1915, the Singapore Hokkien Huay Kuan 
established a school for girls called Chong Hock Girls’ School (present-
day Chongfu School) that was situated beside Thian Hock Keng Temple 
on Telok Ayer Street. The first Chinese secondary school for boys – the 
Chinese High School (present-day Hwa Chong Institution) – was started by 
a group of rich businessmen led by Tan Kah Kee in 1919.
Some Malay schools were also built by wealthy individuals in the early
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 164) ---
20th century. For example, the Alsagoff Arab School (Madrasah Alsagoff  
Al-Arabiah) was founded in 1912 with the help of Syed Mohamed bin Ahmed 
Alsagoff. Students were taught Arabic language and Islamic knowledge as 
well as reading and writing in English and Malay.
Schools were also set up by organisations such as the Ramakrishna Mission 
in the early 20th century. For example, they established schools that taught 
students in both English and Tamil.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 164) ---
students in both English and Tamil.
Some other schools, such as Convent of the Holy Infant Jesus, Raffles 
Institution and St Joseph’s Institution, were also set up in the 19th century 
by various individuals and organisations. See Map 4.3 on the following two 
pages for the early locations of these schools. Syed Mohamed bin Ahmed Alsagoff
 Alsagoff Arab School on Jalan Sultan
 Staff and students at the Ramakrishna Mission 
Tamil School, first half of the 20th century
155
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 164) ---
Tamil School, first half of the 20th century
155
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 165) ---
Hill StreetStamford Road
Armenian StreetCanning RiseBras Basah Road
Fort Canning Park 
Raffles Girls’ School  
Founded 
1879
Founding Principal  
Miss M. Nelson Raffles Girls’ School on Queen Street, c. 1928
Anglo-Chinese School   
(present-day Singapore Philatelic Museum)
Founded 
1886
Founder  
Reverend William Fitzjames Oldham
 Anglo-Chinese School at the foot of Fort Canning,  
c. 1890
Tao Nan School  
(present-day Peranakan Museum)
Founded 
1906
Founder
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 165) ---
Founded 
1906
Founder  
Singapore Hokkien Huay Kuan Tao Nan School on Armenian Street, 1910
156
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942) Map 4.3: Present-day map showing the locations of some of the early schools in Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 166) ---
St Joseph’s Institution on Bras Basah Road, c. 1910
St Joseph’s Institution  
(present-day Singapore Art Museum)
Founded 
1852
Founder  
John Baptist de La Salle
Stamford RoadBras Basah RoadQueen Street
Victoria Street
Convent of the Holy Infant Jesus   
(present-day CHIJMES)
Founded 
1854
Founder  
Blessed Nicolas Barré
 Convent of the Holy Infant Jesus on Bras Basah Road, 
c. 1910
Raffles Institution  
(site of present-day Raffles City)
Founded 
1823
Founder
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 166) ---
Founded 
1823
Founder  
Sir Stamford Raffles Raffles Institution on Bras Basah Road, c. 1920
Catholic High School  
Founded 
1935
Founder  
Reverend Father Edward Becheras Catholic High School on Queen Street, c. 1936
157
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 167) ---
Healthcare 
Lack of nutrition, poor sanitation and overcrowding meant that diseases 
such as malaria, cholera, typhoid, smallpox and tuberculosis were common 
among migrants. Many of the sick lay on the road with sores on their 
bodies, too weak to move. When they died, their bodies were left on  
the roads. 
The government did little to provide healthcare and related social services 
for the public. Thus, various local groups took it upon themselves to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 167) ---
develop self-help organisations instead of relying on the government to 
address this issue. For example, Gan Eng Seng, whom we read about earlier, 
led the establishment of Thong Chai Medical Institution in the latter part 
of the 19th century. This institution ran a clinic to give free treatment and 
free medicine to poor people of all races.
 The former Thong Chai Medical Institution  
on Eu Tong Sen Street has been preserved  
as a national monument.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 167) ---
as a national monument.
 Patients at Thong Chai Medical Institution,  
c. 1890s Doctor tending to a patient at Thong Chai Medical 
Institution, 1890s
158
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 168) ---
Health conditions in the 19th century were very bad. The poor and sick were given little access to medical treatment. Tan, 
an immigrant of Fujian descent from Melaka who became a wealthy trader in Singapore, offered to donate $5,000 to set 
up a hospital for the poor. On 25 May 1844, the foundation stone for Tan’s hospital was laid on Pearl’s Hill. The hospital 
was first called Chinese Pauper* Hospital. It was later named Tan Tock Seng Hospital.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 168) ---
– Adapted from an online description of the establishment of a paupers’ hospital in Singapore 
* A pauper refers to a person who is very poor.SOURCE 5
 Tan Tock Seng
 Tablet at Tan Tock Seng Hospital 
outlining the early history of the hospital1. According to Source 5, how did Tan Tock Seng’s actions benefit the people in Singapore?Other successful businessmen, motivated by the desire to help the less 
fortunate, donated large sums of money to provide medical services
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 168) ---
and amenities. This included building water wells for the community and 
ensuring that the poor had proper burials after they passed away. Among 
these businessmen was Tan Tock Seng, who constructed a hospital for the 
poor using land donated by Syed Omar bin Ali Aljunied. Read Source 5 to 
find out more about what he did for the people in Singapore.
 Painting by John Turnbull Thomson 
showing the Chinese Pauper Hospital 
(later known as Tan Tock Seng Hospital)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 168) ---
(later known as Tan Tock Seng Hospital) 
on Pearl’s Hill, 1848 Location of Tan Tock Seng Hospital, then at  
Pearl’s Hill, from a map published in 1862
159
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 169) ---
How Did the Migrants Participate  
in Making Laws for Singapore? 
In the early years of Singapore’s establishment, all decisions were made by 
the British for the people in Singapore. Most migrants were not interested 
in having a say in how Singapore was governed since they were not thinking 
of staying in Singapore for long. Nevertheless, over time, some migrants 
participated in making laws that helped make Singapore a better place to 
work and live in.
Local Involvement in the Government
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 169) ---
Local Involvement in the Government
In Chapter 3, you saw that after 1867, the government in Singapore was 
headed by a Governor who ruled with the help of an Executive Council 
and a Legislative Council. Look at Figure 4.3 below, which shows the 
composition of the Legislative Council in 1869, comprising the Governor, 
eight official members and five non-official members.5
 Figure 4.3: Diagram showing the composition of the Legislative Council in 1869Legislative Council
Official
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 169) ---
Official 
membersGovernor
Non-official 
members
5 Official members in the Legislative Council assisted the Governor in running the affairs of the Straits Settlements. When it 
came to voting, they had to support the Governor. The non-official members, who were made up of European and Asian 
traders, could speak and vote as they pleased.
160
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)European
Asian
What do you notice 
about the members of 
the Legislative Council
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 169) ---
about the members of 
the Legislative Council  
in 1869?Think!
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 170) ---
For many years, the non-official members of the Legislative Council 
consisted of only a few European and Asian traders. As they were 
outnumbered by the official members (comprising only Europeans), 
and so could be outvoted, it was very difficult for them to persuade 
the government to act on their suggestions. This made the non-official 
members unhappy.
Over the years, there was pressure on the government to increase their
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 170) ---
numbers. By 1924, the number of non-official members had increased, with 
an equal number of non-official and official members in the Legislative 
Council. This was also a step towards getting more local people involved 
in the affairs of the colony.
Asian non-official members such as Dr Lim Boon Keng and Eunos Abdullah 
proposed laws that were passed by the Legislative Council. For example, in 
1927, Eunos Abdullah asked the government to set aside a very large piece
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 170) ---
of land for a Malay settlement called Kampong Melayu. The settlement 
subsequently provided low-cost housing for the Malays and allowed them 
to earn a living by growing fruit and vegetables as well as rearing poultry.
 Scene showing residents at Kampong Melayu in 1935. The residents are celebrating the 25th anniversary of 
the reign of the British King George V.
Who was  
DR LIM BOON KENG?
?
Who was  
EUNOS ABDULLAH?
?Dr Lim Boon Keng (1869–1957) 
was born into a family of Chinese
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 170) ---
was born into a family of Chinese 
Peranakans in Singapore. He was the 
first Chinese to be awarded the Queen’s 
Scholarship (now known as the 
President’s Scholarship) in 1887.  
He studied medicine in Edinburgh.  
After returning to Singapore in 1893,  
he opened a dispensary (pharmacy) to 
treat patients suffering from cholera. 
Apart from his involvement in the 
Legislative Council, he also launched 
campaigns to fight opium use in 
Singapore and played a role in the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 170) ---
Singapore and played a role in the 
development of Chinese and English 
education for young Chinese.
Eunos Abdullah (1876–1933), the son 
of a Sumatran trader, was one of  
a select few Malay boys to attend  
Raffles Institution at that time.  
He worked in Johor after his studies, 
then returned in 1907 to Singapore, 
where he was responsible for editing 
a new Malay-language newspaper 
called Utusan Melayu . He later 
became the first Malay and only 
Muslim representative appointed by
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 170) ---
Muslim representative appointed by 
the colonial government to sit on the 
Straits Settlements Legislative Council 
in 1924.
However, there were times when proposals by Asian leaders were  
rejected by the Legislative Council. One example is the ban on opium 
proposed by Dr Lim Boon Keng from 1895 onwards. Read the illustrated 
story on the next page to find out what happened.
161
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 171) ---
Dr Lim Boon Keng wanted opium 
smoking to be banned as he saw 
how it had destroyed many Chinese 
migrants’ lives. He spoke about the 
evils of opium smoking both in and 
outside the Legislative Council.The Legislative Council was unwilling to  
ban opium as it would mean a great loss  
of income for the government. 
To make up for the possible loss of income for the 
government, the Governor at that time, Sir John Anderson, 
asked the Legislative Council to pass a law to tax people’s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 171) ---
salaries and profits from their businesses.Many members in the Legislative Council 
opposed the income tax law as it would 
greatly reduce their incomes.
Due to the fierce opposition, the 
income tax law was not passed. Opium 
was not banned and the government 
continued to obtain a large part of its 
income from opium until the Japanese 
Occupation of Malaya and Singapore.The PROPOSAL to BAN OPIUMThe PROPOSAL to BAN OPIUM
162
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 172) ---
British Attitudes Towards the Locals
As we read earlier, local non-official members such as Dr Lim Boon Keng  
and Eunos Abdullah used their influence to persuade the colonial 
government to increase the number of local non-official members in the 
Legislative Council and introduce proposals to help the local people. Some 
of these local non-official members also formed associations such as the 
Straits Chinese British Association and the Kesatuan Melayu Singapura
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 172) ---
(Singapore Malay Union) to improve the lives of the people.
Though there were attempts to involve some of the locals in making 
laws, the British rulers did not treat the Asians as equals. They believed 
that British culture was superior, and that they had the responsibility of 
“civilising” those they ruled. This belief in British superiority was reflected 
in how Singapore was governed. Most of the high-ranking officials in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 172) ---
the colonial government were British. Even well-qualified locals were not 
given important positions in the government.
Most of the Europeans in Singapore were also given privileged treatment. 
Read Source 6 to find out more.
There were other instances of privileged treatment. For example, the 
railway department discouraged Asians from travelling in first-class 
carriages. In certain hotels, Asians were not allowed to use the dance floor 
or the bar as these were reserved solely for Europeans.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 172) ---
I called Mr Tan Ah Hung, a senior Chinese teacher, “Sir”, when I spoke to him, until I was advised that this embarrassed 
him in the kind of world we lived in. My starting salary of $400 was far higher than his even though he had many years  
of most valued service. Salary and skin colour were what mattered, not personal merit and achievement.
– Adapted from an account by Francis Thomas, a British teacher  
at St Andrew’s School in Singapore in the 1930sSOURCE 6
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 172) ---
1. Why was Mr Tan embarrassed when Thomas called him “Sir”?
2. What does this source show you about the treatment of Asians by the British during this time? Members of the Straits Chinese British 
Association, c. 1900
163
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 173) ---
Conclusion
From the outset, Singapore flourished because of a number of reasons. 
Among them, the policies of free trade and free immigration established 
by the British helped Singapore develop considerably. These two policies 
led to the arrival of different groups of migrants, who played an important 
role in developing the port city. 
News of Singapore’s establishment as a free port in the centre of a rich 
area of trade spread quickly. By 1824, the population had reached about
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 173) ---
11,000 due to the influx of migrants.
The migrants came to Singapore for various reasons. Many left their 
homelands because of poor living conditions. They were also attracted to  
Singapore, which offered better job prospects and trading opportunities. 
Most came with one thought in mind: to earn as much money as they could 
in the shortest possible time and take it away with them. In doing so, they 
helped develop Singapore as a port city. These included the enterprising
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 173) ---
traders from different parts of the world who used Singapore as a base to 
build their trading networks in the region. The labourers from China, India 
and the surrounding areas also toiled behind the scenes, building many 
parts of Singapore that enabled it to thrive as a port city.
 View of Singapore from a poster of a French movie 
called A Day at Singapore by Gaston Méliès, 
published in 1913
 Indian labourers at a work site in Singapore,  
c. 1870
164
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 173) ---
c. 1870
164
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 174) ---
As Singapore grew into a vibrant port city, some groups of people 
prospered. They provided money and land to help improve the lives of the 
people in Singapore in various areas, including education, healthcare and 
law-making. Together with the British rulers and external developments, 
which you read about in Chapter 3, the various communities helped 
Singapore flourish. 
However, Singapore’s success was disrupted when the Japanese attacked
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 174) ---
at the end of 1941. Find out more about why Singapore fell to the Japanese 
in the next chapter. Painting by Hugo V. Pedersen showing life along 
Trengganu Street in Chinatown, c. 1897
165
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 175) ---
Imagine you are a migrant who moved from China, India or the surrounding regions to Singapore in the  
19th century. You have worked here for three months. You might be an entrepreneur, a labourer or a 
craftsman. What would a typical day in your life look like? What might be your thoughts, feelings and 
actions? You can use the picture below as a frame to share your “life story”.
Share your “life story” with a classmate.
see
smell
hear
saythink
domovewish/hope feelLET’S REVIEW
166
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 175) ---
saythink
domovewish/hope feelLET’S REVIEW
166
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 176) ---
British rule in Singapore created a stable and successful society based on trade, commerce and immigration. 
Thus, the port city developed many trade networks with different countries. This resulted in an increasing 
number of migrants arriving from China, India, the Malay Archipelago and other places around the world. 
Apart from shipping, goods and people, ideas also started coming into Singapore from various parts of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 176) ---
the world. Read the following sources to find out the ways in which Singapore became a centre for the 
exchange and spread of ideas before 1942.In what ways was Singapore considered a centre for  
the exchange and spread of ideas before 1942?
By the end of the 19th century, Singapore was developing into a 
regional intellectual hub * for the various local communities. It 
was also becoming a regional printing and publishing hub. This
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 176) ---
development grew out of the availability of printing presses and 
trained pressmen, introduced by Christian missionaries as early as 
1823. The earliest Singapore-printed books bore the imprint of Mission 
Press or Institution Press. The oldest surviving Japanese version of 
any portion of the Bible was published in Singapore in 1837.
The earliest Malay publications were religious texts, as were the early 
Tamil works. Among the early newspapers published and printed in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 176) ---
Singapore were Jawi Peranakkan (1876), and Chinese papers such 
as Tifang Jih Pau (Local News, 1845) and Jit Sheng (Rising Sun, 
1858). Among the earliest printed books was Munshi Abdullah’s  
Hikayat Abdullah (1849).
The demand for Malay reading materials, which were also read by 
literate Straits Chinese, led to a thriving translation industry of both 
Chinese and English classics.
– Adapted from a description of 19th-century Singapore  
by historians Kwa Chong Guan, Derek Heng,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 176) ---
by historians Kwa Chong Guan, Derek Heng,  
Peter Borschberg and Tan Tai Yong, published in 2019
* An intellectual hub is the main centre for the exchange and spread of 
ideas in a region.SOURCE ACASE INVESTIGATION
 The oldest surviving issue of Jawi Peranakkan   
– the 28 March 1881 (Vol. 5, No. 214) edition
167
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 177) ---
Singapore’s reputation as a centre of Islamic life and learning in the late 19th century was widespread. This reputation 
rested on its position as key stopover for pilgrims† and Arab migrants. It also became a publication and distribution 
centre for Islamic religious writings. Students from all over the Malay Archipelago wishing to further their studies  
in Islamic studies went either to Mecca or to the Straits Settlements, where they studied with scholars, most of whom had 
studied in Mecca.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 177) ---
studied in Mecca.
– Adapted from an account by British historian William Roff of the influence  
of ideas on Singapore from the late 19th century, published in 1967
† Pilgrims are people who go on special journeys for religious reasons.SOURCE C
In the 19th century, most Chinese had little interest in the political affairs of Singapore and Malaya. They were too busy 
trying to make a living to be concerned with much else. In the early years of their move, their ties with China, the country
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 177) ---
they had left, remained strong.
In the early part of the 20th century, Singapore became a suitable place for raising money to support political activities 
in China. In the 1930s, many of the activities by some Chinese organisations were stopped by the British, and on occasion 
their leaders jailed for threatening the peace of the community.
– Adapted from an account by Jim Baker,  
an American history teacher in Singapore, published in 2014SOURCE D
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 177) ---
Singapore was a centre for pilgrims preparing for the 
haj from the late 19th century until the late 1970s.  
This photograph shows pilgrims arriving in Singapore 
after returning from Mecca,* c. 1940s.SOURCE B
* Mecca is a city in present-day Saudi Arabia and is home 
to the Kaaba, the holiest site in Islam and the direction of 
Muslim prayer.
168
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 178) ---
1. Read Source A. In what ways was Singapore “a regional intellectual hub for the various local 
communities”? 
2. Read Sources B and C. How did Singapore serve as a centre for Islamic life and learning? 
3. Read Source D. In what ways did Singapore become a base for the spread of political ideas for the 
Chinese living in Singapore before 1942?
After reading the sources, note down the key points for how Singapore was considered a centre for the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 178) ---
exchange and spread of ideas in the table below. An example has been done for you.
In what ways was Singapore considered a centre for the exchange and spread of ideas before 1942?
Key Point Supporting Evidence from Source(s)
Political ideas coming from China in the early part 
of the 20th century influenced some of the Chinese 
living in Singapore. Some even raised money to 
support political activities taking place in China.Source D states that “in the early part
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 178) ---
of the 20th century, Singapore became a suitable 
place for raising money to support political 
activities in China”.
Using the points you have written down, describe the ways in which Singapore was a centre for the 
exchange and spread of ideas before 1942.INVESTIGATE!
REPORT!
169
WHAT ROLE DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE PLAY IN ITS DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY FROM 1819 TO 1942?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 180) ---
In Chapters 3 and 4, you saw how Singapore enjoyed a period of peace 
and prosperity under British rule. However, this was not to last.  
World War II broke out in Europe in 1939 and spread to Asia in 1941. By  
15 February 1942, Singapore had fallen to Japanese invasion.
Coming only 70 days after Japanese troops first landed on the coast of 
northern Malaya, the fall of Singapore has often been described as one of 
the greatest British military disasters of World War II. How could this have
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 180) ---
happened? Why were the British defeated in such a short time? Could 
Singapore have been defended against the Japanese?
 British commanders on their way to surrender to 
the Japanese at the Ford Factory in Bukit Timah, 
15 February 1942Chapter at a Glance
171
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?CHAPTER  
5
Did Singapore Have to Fall to  
the Japanese in World War II?
You will learn:
• Why the Japanese invaded 
Singapore during World War II
• Why Singapore fell to the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 180) ---
• Why Singapore fell to the 
Japanese during World War II
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 181) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)Timeline
In Singapore
 
Beyond Singapore
Adolf Hitler comes  
to power in Germany.
The British decide to build 
a naval base in Singapore.The modernisation 
of Japan begins.
World War IGermany is severely 
weakened by the 
peace treaty that 
ends World War I.
1921 1933
 The naval base at Sembawang 
under construction
 Painting showing the arrival  
of a US warship in Japan
  Adolf Hitler British soldiers, wearing
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 181) ---
Adolf Hitler British soldiers, wearing  
anti-gas helmets, operating  
a machine gun during  
a battle in World War I
United States warships 
arrive in Japan.
1853 1919 1914–1918 1868
172
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 182) ---
Japan attacks Pearl Harbor; 
start of World War II in  
the Asia PacificJapanese forces land  
in southern Thailand  
and northern Malaya.
Japan invades China.
Singapore’s naval 
base is officially 
opened.Germany invades 
Poland; start of  
World War II in EuropeThe United States stops 
selling oil to Japan.Germany defeats France 
and takes over most  
of Europe; Britain is  
the only major power 
in Western Europe left 
opposing Germany.
The naval base 
and its defences
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 182) ---
The naval base 
and its defences 
are completed.British forces surrender 
in Singapore.
 The naval base, 1941  General Percival and party on their 
way to surrender Singapore to the 
Japanese on 15 February 1942 German soldiers entering Poland 
at the start of World War II
 Battleship USS Arizona burning 
after the attack on Pearl Harbor, 
7 December 1941
1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942
173
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 183) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)In Chapter 2, you learnt that historians often examine the causes of key historical events. This is not always 
a straightforward matter. Related events do not necessarily take place one after another, and one event 
does not always lead to another. To really understand how a historical event came about, historians have to 
examine the possible causes from different angles. One useful way is to look at them in terms of:
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 183) ---
• the broader context or setting (e.g., physical, political, economic, social, cultural, military) in which  
the event took place;
• the immediate or local circumstances of the event (e.g., whether people were unhappy or prepared to 
act, the weather on the day of the event); and
• the roles of key historical actors (individuals who made major decisions that contributed to the historical 
event).
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 183) ---
event).
Besides looking at causes separately, it is also useful to look at how different causes might have interacted 
with one another. Keep this in mind as you read about the fall of Singapore during World War II in this 
chapter.
Historical Actors
(people involved in 
 making key decisions  
that contributed to  
the historical event)
Circumstances
(local or immediate  
conditions where  
the historical event  
happened)Context
(the setting in which 
the historical event 
happened)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 183) ---
the historical event 
happened)
Historical 
EventBE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CAUSATION
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
174
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 184) ---
Why Did War Break Out in the Asia Pacific in 1941?
To understand why World War II began and spread to the Asia Pacific, we must look at what happened before 
that. In the 1920s, the British Empire was the largest in the world, comprising over a quarter of the world’s land 
area and population. However, in the 1930s, two rising countries, Germany and Japan, began to pose serious 
threats to the British Empire and to international peace, as illustrated below:
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 184) ---
The economy was in ruins and there was great hardship.
In these circumstances, Adolf Hitler 
and his Nazi Party rose to power. They wanted to make Germany  
a great power again, and hence won 
the support of many Germans.
They rebuilt the German 
military into something 
more powerful than before.
By the late 1930s, it seemed as if Germany
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 184) ---
By the late 1930s, it seemed as if Germany 
was getting ready for another war.* A great power is a very strong country that can dominate or influence other countries.After World War I, Germany lost its status as a great power. *
175
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?The RISE of NAZI GERMANYThe RISE of NAZI GERMANY
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 185) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
From the 17th to mid-19th centuries, 
Japan had kept to itself.
Foreigners were banned, except at a few trading ports.
The Japanese realised that they had 
fallen far behind the Western countries.Everything changed in 1853, when warships from the 
United States arrived. The United States wanted Japan 
to open more ports and increase trade between them.
To catch up, Japan had to change.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 185) ---
To catch up, Japan had to change.
In less than 50 years, Japan became a modern, industrialised country.
176
The RISE of MODERN JAPANThe RISE of MODERN JAPAN
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 186) ---
To do this, the Japanese set out to build their own 
empire in Asia, which would give them the land and 
resources they needed.
This would eventually bring Japan into 
conflict with Britain and the United States.However, being a mountainous and heavily forested 
country, Japan lacked natural resources of its own.At the same time, Japan had ambitions 
of becoming a great power.
Britain Japan The United States
177
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 187) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
Towards the end of the 1930s, the international situation deteriorated drastically. Large-scale conflict broke out 
both in Europe and in Asia. These developments had important implications for the security of Britain and its 
empire overseas, as shown below:
Having rebuilt the German military, Hitler 
planned to make Germany even more powerful.
Soon, Germany began taking over 
some of its neighbouring countries.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 187) ---
some of its neighbouring countries.
Britain was the only country left in 
Western Europe opposing Germany.On the other side of the world, 
in Asia, the drums of war were 
also beating more loudly.
In 1937, Japan invaded China.
To force the Japanese out of China, the 
United States stopped selling oil to Japan.Japan would not withdraw from China. But it was 
desperate for oil to keep its industries going.
GERMANY
FRANCEBELGIUMNETHERLANDSBRITAIN
English ChannelNorth Sea
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 187) ---
English ChannelNorth Sea
By 1940, Germany had defeated France 
and taken over most of Europe.In September 1939, Germany invaded Poland. To stop Hitler, Britain and 
France declared war on Germany. Thus, World War II began in Europe.GERMANYPOLAND
178
The OUTBREAK of WORLD WAR IIThe OUTBREAK of WORLD WAR II
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 188) ---
The worsening situation in Europe and the Asia Pacific during the 1930s meant the British had to make some 
difficult choices. They had to weigh the defence of the British homeland against the defence of its widespread 
overseas empire. Ultimately, defending Britain itself was more important. As we shall see later, this decision 
had an impact on British plans for defending Malaya and Singapore, and the actual forces available to resist the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 188) ---
Japanese invasion. Southeast Asia was a possible solution to 
Japan’s problems. It had plenty of oil and 
other useful resources such as tin and rubber.
Only one country stood in Japan’s way. That was the 
United States, with its powerful naval fleet stationed at 
Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.
In December 1941, the 
Japanese navy attacked 
Pearl Harbor, putting much 
of the United States naval 
forces in the Pacific out of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 188) ---
forces in the Pacific out of 
action for some time.At the same time, Japanese forces landed 
in southern Thailand and northern Malaya.
World War II had 
come to Asia.
N
Pearl HarborHAWAII
PACIFIC OCEAN
Legend
Oil
Rubber
Tin
179
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 189) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)Was Singapore Really an 
“Impregnable Fortress”?
By the late 1930s, Singapore had come to be thought of by many people 
as an “impregnable fortress”.1 How did this come about? Was Singapore 
really such an “impregnable fortress”?
British Defence Plans
The Rising Threat of Japan
During the 1920s, the British realised that Japan was a possible threat to 
their empire in the Far East. This was because Japan had ambitions to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 189) ---
create its own empire in Asia. In particular, Singapore and Malaya were 
important targets, as they would give Japan access to the rich natural 
resources of Southeast Asia and control over the vital shipping route of 
the Straits of Melaka. Malaya’s tin and rubber would support Japanese  
industries and war production, while Singapore’s port and important 
location made it an ideal base for Japanese attacks on the Dutch East Indies
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 189) ---
(present-day Indonesia) and possibly even Australia. Conquering Singapore 
would also be a great boost to Japan’s national pride.
The “Singapore Strategy”
Given the importance of Malaya and Singapore, the British had to make 
preparations to defend them against the rising threat of Japan. However, 
Britain had been exhausted by World War I and the British public were 
unwilling to keep up military spending after the horrible experience of the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 189) ---
war. As a result, British power had declined and Britain was no longer able 
to maintain a large permanent military force to protect its colonies in Asia.
To solve this problem, the British decided to construct a large, modern naval 
base in Asia. Singapore was chosen as the site because of its geographical 
location and importance as a port. In the event of a war, Britain would send 
a fleet of warships to the base to protect its large overseas empire. While
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 189) ---
the fleet was on its way, Singapore would have to rely on local defences 
built by the British. This plan became known as the “Singapore strategy”.2 Map 5.1: Territories occupied or controlled by 
Japan, November 1941
JAPAN
AUSTRALIASingaporeINDOCHINA
DUTCH EAST INDIESMALAYA
Straits of 
MelakaKOREAMANCHURIA
CHINAN
After the British set up a trading post 
in Singapore in 1819, the question 
of how to defend it arose. However, 
little was done until the outbreak of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 189) ---
little was done until the outbreak of 
war between Russia and Britain in 
1854. Fort Canning was built in 1860, 
but turned out to be inadequate for 
defence purposes. It was not until after  
World War I that Singapore began  
to have stronger defences.DID YOU KNOW?
1 A fortress is a place or building set up for defence against enemy attacks. The key features include strong walls, gun positions,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 189) ---
underground bunkers (shelters), and the presence of a large number of troops. Singapore was known as an “impregnable fortress” 
because it was thought to be very difficult, if not impossible, for an enemy to conquer.
2 A strategy is a broad, general, long-term plan to achieve one or more objectives.
180
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 190) ---
Sembawang, an area in northern 
Singapore, was chosen as the 
location for the naval base. By 1941, 
the naval base and its defences were 
completed: military airfields were 
constructed at Tengah, Sembawang 
and Seletar, and gun positions were 
set up to defend Singapore against 
attacks from the sea (see Map 5.2).
NKallang Airport, opened in 1937,  
was originally built as a civil airport. 
It was used as a military airfield when 
the Japanese invaded Singapore.DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 190) ---
the Japanese invaded Singapore.DID YOU KNOW?
 Map 5.2: Singapore’s main defences, 1941
181
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?Tengah 
Pasir Laba
Buona Vista
Labrador
Siloso
ConnaughtSerapongSilingsingChangiSphinx
Tekong Besar
Beting Kusah JohoreSembawang 
Seletar 
KallangSembawangCauseway MALAYA
SINGAPORENorth coast 
Lacking defences
East and south coasts 
Well fortified
 View of the naval base in Sembawang, 1941 Japanese soldiers at Kallang Airport, 1942
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 190) ---
One of the coastal defence guns in Singapore
Legend
     Naval base
    Airfield
    Gun position
Sphinx Name of gun position
    Size of ammunition fired by guns  
  (inches):
 15  9.2  6
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 191) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)In addition to the naval base, the British built underground bunkers in secret places all over the island. These bunkers were used 
for defence purposes, such as stores and air-raid shelters. One of the most extensive networks of bunkers lies at Fort Canning,  
where the headquarters of the British forces was located.DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 191) ---
The entrance (left) and interior (right) of Battlebox, an underground British military command centre, which is open to the public as part of the Battlebox tour
 Figure 5.1: Changes in the “Singapore strategy” over time. Note how the estimated time for the British fleet to arrive in Singapore increased, while the number of ships 
decreased, even as the international situation worsened in the 1930s.The completion of the naval base and its accompanying defences led many
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 191) ---
people to believe that Singapore was an “impregnable fortress” . However, 
the “Singapore strategy” turned out to be unrealistic. For example, it was 
initially assumed that the situation in Europe would remain peaceful so 
that a powerful fleet of warships could be sent to Singapore if necessary. 
As it happened, that was not possible because of the rise of Nazi 
Germany and the subsequent outbreak of World War II in Europe. Britain 
needed all the defences it had to protect itself.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 191) ---
needed all the defences it had to protect itself.
THE “SINGAPORE STRATEGY”
1921
1938
SEP 1939
What else did  
the British assume  
when they adopted the 
“Singapore strategy”? 
 Were these assumptions  
valid or did they turn out 
to be unrealistic?Think!
182
British decide to 
construct a naval 
base in Singapore
Naval base opens
World War II 
breaks out  
in EuropeYear EventEstimated Time 
for British Fleet to 
Reach SingaporeNumber of Ships to 
Be Sent to Singapore
20 ships
Unknown8 ships42
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 191) ---
Be Sent to Singapore
20 ships
Unknown8 ships42 
days
180 
days70 
daysN
BRITAIN
SINGAPORE
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 192) ---
Australian soldiers moving through the Malayan 
jungle during a training exercise,  May 1941
 Men from the Straits Settlements Volunteer Force 
in training, November 1941The Defence of Malaya
In order for the “Singapore strategy” to work, the naval base had to be 
defended until the British war fleet arrived. However, the British began 
to realise that the defence of Singapore and the naval base was linked 
to the defence of Malaya. Singapore could not be held if Malaya was
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 192) ---
lost. Thus, defending Malaya became an issue of importance to British  
military planners.
At first, the British thought that Singapore could not be attacked from  
the north. They believed it was difficult to land troops in Malaya during the 
monsoon and advance through the thick jungles. Hence, when the British 
built the naval base in Singapore, they put in place defences to protect it 
from sea attacks from the south and the east but not from an attack from
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 192) ---
Malaya in the north (see Map 5.2 on page 181). The naval base, its defences, 
and the natural protection of the Malayan jungles led the British to believe 
that Singapore was as strong as a fortress.
By the 1930s, British military commanders in Malaya realised that their 
assumptions were untrue. With improved equipment, troops could land 
in Malaya even during the wet and windy monsoon season. Furthermore, 
with the construction and improvement of roads and railways, an army
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 192) ---
could move through Malaya without going through the jungle. 
183
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 193) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)Johor and Singapore are linked by the Causeway, which was completed in 1924. 
The Straits of Johor, which separates the two, is only 1.6 to 4.8 km wide. An enemy 
conquering Johor could launch air and artillery attacks on the naval base without 
having to invade Singapore itself!DID YOU KNOW?
Given all these developments, it became clear to the British that it was
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 193) ---
essential to defend Malaya from hostile attacks. They drew up plans to 
prevent an enemy army from landing in northern Malaya. Military airfields 
were built in many parts of Malaya to provide bases for aircraft to defend 
it from hostile landings. In this way, the British hoped to deter potential 
enemies from invading their colonies.
 Pilots running to their planes at Sembawang Airfield in Singapore, c. 1941 Buffalo fighter planes over Malaya, c. 1941
Causeway 
 Straits of Johor
Johor
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 193) ---
Causeway 
 Straits of Johor
Johor
Singapore
184
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 194) ---
As you learnt in Chapter 1, historians rely on a variety of sources to answer historical questions and construct 
accounts of the past. Not only do they have to examine each source, they also have to compare them to check 
the information they contain.
How do we compare sources? Look at the steps below.
Understand the question
It is necessary to understand the question, so that you can keep it in mind when reading 
the sources.Step
1
Identify the criterion for comparison
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 194) ---
1
Identify the criterion for comparison
Based on the question, identify the criterion for comparison. This can also be done by 
looking at the common topic or issue of the sources.Step
2
Make inferences from each sourceStep
3
a. Read each source for relevant information
Study each source carefully and pick out details that are relevant to the question.
b. Infer what each source says in relation to the criterion for comparison
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 194) ---
Make use of the source details and your background knowledge to help you.  
You will have already learnt this in Chapter 2.LEARN A SKILL: COMPARING SOURCES
Match the inferences from both sources 
using the criterion for comparisonStep
4
Match the inferences you have gathered from both sources. Determine whether 
the sources are similar or different based on the criterion for comparison. Do the 
sources agree or differ with each other? Do they give the same or different answers to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 194) ---
the question?
185
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 195) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)Here is an example of how to compare sources using these steps.
Example
Noel is studying the fall of Singapore during World War II. He wants to answer a question on Singapore’s 
defences. He goes to the archives and finds two relevant sources (Sources 1 and 2 below). How should Noel 
compare the sources?
They [the British] talked about Singapore as an 
impregnable fortress. Some called it the Gibraltar of the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 195) ---
East.* As far as I knew … they had a lot of big guns here 
… and they had concrete beach defences … I thought the 
defence was quite good.
– Adapted from an account by Ismail bin Zain,  
a clerk in Singapore in the 1930s
* Gibraltar, a British overseas territory in Europe, was heavily 
fortified due to its important location. It was considered difficult 
to conquer partly because it was surrounded by high cliffs and 
the sea. Singapore was sometimes referred to as the Gibraltar
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 195) ---
of the East to indicate that Singapore was also heavily fortified.
No one should have been fooled by the legend of the 
mighty fortress of Singapore. The place had none of 
the natural characteristics of an old time fortress like 
Gibraltar; nor was it “fortified” in any way, though it 
had been armed with guns which were useless against 
anything but a sea-borne assault.
– Adapted from an account written after the war by  
C. A. Vlieland, who was Secretary of Defence in the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 195) ---
Singapore government from 1939 to 1941SOURCE 1 SOURCE 2
The question that Noel wants to answer is “Was 
Singapore really a fortress?”. So he reads Sources 1 
and 2 to find what they say about whether Singapore 
was a fortress.
From Source 1, Noel infers that Singapore was a 
fortress as it had “a lot of big guns” and “concrete 
beach defences”, which meant “the defence was 
quite good”.
From Source 2, Noel infers that Singapore was not a
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 195) ---
fortress, because it was not “‘fortified’ in any way”, and 
the guns it had were “useless” against most attacks.Sources 1 and 2 both talk about whether Singapore 
was a fortress. Since that is also the question Noel 
wants to answer, the criterion for comparing the 
sources is their views on whether Singapore was  
a fortress.
Sources 1 and 2 disagree in what they say about 
whether Singapore was a fortress. Source 1 says 
Singapore was a fortress, but Source 2 says it was
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 195) ---
not. Hence, Noel concludes that Sources 1 and 2 
have different views on whether Singapore was  
a fortress.Understand the question
Make inferences from each sourceIdentify the criterion for comparison
Match the inferences from both sources1
32
4
186
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 196) ---
Now compare Sources 2 and 3 using the same steps. Do they agree on whether Singapore was a fortress? 
Why or why not? Make use of the diagram below to help you. An example has been done for you.
By definition, a fortress is a place that can be defended against attack from any direction. 
However, even if a place is too strong to attack directly, an enemy who is prepared to 
wait or negotiate can still in the end capture it through starvation or betrayal. Anyway,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 196) ---
the classic fortress had been invented before there were aircraft capable of dropping 
bombs over fixed defences.
We have seen that attacking Singapore from the land side was regarded as impossible 
and that no steps were taken to build defences there.
– Adapted from a book on the fall of Singapore by historians  
Richard Holmes and Anthony Kemp, published in 1982SOURCE 3
Inference
Source 
details
MatchSource 
detailsInference
Was 
Singapore  
a fortress?Criterion for 
comparisonSOURCE 2
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 196) ---
a fortress?Criterion for 
comparisonSOURCE 2
Singapore was  
not a fortress
Singapore was not 
“‘fortified’ in any way”.
The guns it had were 
“useless” against  
most attacks.
Sources 2 and 3 are  (similar/different) in their views on whether Singapore was a fortress.
SOURCE 3LEARN ON THE GO
Sharpen your source 
comparison skills @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc501.
187
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 197) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
British Forces
Although the British made plans to defend Singapore and Malaya, they 
did not have enough resources available to carry them out. Apart from 
resisting German invasion in Europe, the British were also fighting in North 
Africa and supporting the Soviet Union in its struggle against Germany. 
Compared to these demands, defending its colonies in the Far East was of 
low priority.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 197) ---
low priority.
As a result, whatever military forces the British could spare for Malaya 
and Singapore were insufficient in both number and quality. For example, 
the British air force in Malaya and Singapore comprised mostly ageing and 
outdated Buffalo fighters, nicknamed “flying coffins” due to the short 
life expectancy of their pilots in battle. They were also outnumbered 
by Japan’s modern Zero fighters. Thus, during the fighting, most of the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 197) ---
British fighters were destroyed and the remainder evacuated to the  
Dutch East Indies or Australia. There were also not enough troops to 
protect the numerous military airfields all over Malaya. In the end, the 
Japanese were able to capture many of these airfields and use them to 
attack other parts of Malaya and Singapore.
Furthermore, the forces defending Malaya and Singapore came from many 
different parts of the British Empire, including Scotland, India and Australia
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 197) ---
(see Figure 5.2). This made it difficult for the military commanders to 
understand and work with one another. While some units fought bravely 
during the Japanese invasion, many of the soldiers did not feel it was their 
duty to fight hard and sacrifice themselves in the defence of the colonies. 
The British were also reluctant to call on the locals to contribute to the 
defence. Only a small number of local forces were raised and they often
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 197) ---
received minimal training and equipment. The outdated Buffalo fighters (above) used 
by the British in Malaya were no match for 
the Japanese Zero fighters (top).
 Scottish soldiers training in Singapore (left) and Gurkha soldiers from India training in Malaya (right) just before the war. These troops helped defend Malaya 
and Singapore against the Japanese invasion.
188
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 198) ---
Figure 5.2: The ground forces defending Singapore included soldiers from Britain, India, Australia and Malaya, as well as volunteers from the Straits Settlements  
and Singapore.
 Soldiers from the Australian 8th Division arriving in Singapore, 1941. The 8th Division suffered heavy casualties during the war.
BRITAIN INDIA
SINGAPORE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS MALAYAAUSTRALIA
 18th Division  III Corps  
(9th and 11th Divisions) 8th Division
 Malay Regiment  Singapore Overseas 
Chinese Volunteer
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 198) ---
Chinese Volunteer 
Army (Dalforce) Straits Settlements 
Volunteer Force
189
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 199) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
Most of the troops sent to Malaya and Singapore were poorly trained 
and ill-equipped. There were no tanks and very few anti-tank weapons, 
because the British thought tanks were unsuitable for the jungle. The 
soldiers received little or no training in fighting in the tropical climate. To 
make matters worse, there were not enough officers to lead the men. The
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 199) ---
British forces were led by General Arthur Percival. Though an experienced 
and capable officer, he had not led such a large and diverse military force 
before in actual combat.
As mentioned earlier, Singapore’s defences were designed to prevent  
an attack from the sea. The big guns put in place were to be used for firing 
at big ships. While these guns could be turned landwards to fire at enemies 
on land, they were not equipped with the right ammunition to shoot at 
such enemies.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 199) ---
such enemies.
Due to the war in Europe, the 
British could only afford to send 
a very small fleet of warships to 
Singapore. The fleet comprised two 
battleships, HMS Prince of Wales  
and HMS Repulse, and a small 
number of escorting warships. This 
naval force was called Force Z.
 HMS Prince of WalesWho was  
GENERAL  
ARTHUR PERCIVAL?
?
Arthur Percival (1887–1966) did 
not set out to be a soldier. He was 
originally a clerk at an iron trading 
company after leaving school.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 199) ---
company after leaving school.  
When World War I broke out, he 
enlisted in the army. He was rapidly 
promoted and earned several honours,  
ending the war as a respected Major. 
Thereafter, Percival remained in the 
army, serving in places such as Russia 
and Ireland.
In 1936, Percival was posted to Malaya 
to take charge of defence planning.  
It was during this time that he became 
aware of the Japanese threat to 
Singapore’s security. He thought  
about how the Japanese might attack,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 199) ---
about how the Japanese might attack, 
which turned out to be very similar  
to the actual invasion during  
World War II. A plan was drawn up to 
occupy southern Thailand to prevent 
Japanese troops from landing there, 
but it was not carried out as the  
British feared it would offend the  
Thai government.
In 1941, Percival was appointed as 
the General Officer Commanding 
(Malaya), with the temporary rank of 
Lieutenant-General. Thus, he became 
the overall commander of the forces
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 199) ---
the overall commander of the forces 
defending Malaya and Singapore 
against the Japanese invasion.
One of Singapore’s 15-inch coastal defence guns
190
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 200) ---
HMS Repulse (front) leading 
other Royal Navy ships during 
an exercise, late 1920s 
 Map 5.3: HMS Prince of Wales and HMS Repulse  
were sunk just off Kuantan in the east coast  
of Malaya. On 8 December 1941, Force Z sailed out of the naval base in Singapore 
and headed towards Kuantan (see Map 5.3), where the British thought 
Japanese soldiers would be landing. On 10 December, the fleet was spotted 
by Japanese planes, which bombed and sank both battleships. Several
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 200) ---
hundred men, including the Admiral commanding Force Z, went down with 
the ships. This was a serious blow to British naval power in the region.
Read Source 4 to find out what people in Singapore thought about the 
loss of Force Z at the time.
With the destruction of Force Z and the air force, the British had lost their 
naval and air superiority in the region. The Japanese could make use of 
their mastery of the air and the seas to reinforce their attacks. Only the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 200) ---
British army was left to repel the Japanese attacks.
We had been informed that HMS Prince of Wales and HMS Repulse had been sunk by the Japanese. Radio broadcasts 
and newspapers in Singapore tried to reduce the importance of the naval disaster. They also urged the people to remain 
strong, loyal and confident and informed them that better days were ahead. Large military reinforcements were coming
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 200) ---
to Singapore, so we were told. Singapore as the Gibraltar of the East could be held by the British indefinitely. We were 
thus comforted and reassured.
– Adapted from an account by Thio Chan Bee, a teacher in Singapore in the early 1940s
1. According to Source 4, were the people worried by the loss of Force Z?
2. Why do you think the radio broadcasts and newspapers tried to paint such an optimistic
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 200) ---
picture of the situation in Singapore?1. According to Source 4, were the people worried by the loss of Force Z?
2. Why do you think the radio broadcasts and newspapers tried to paint  
such an optimistic picture of the situation in Singapore?SOURCE 4
Kuantan
Kuala LumpurHMS Repulse
HMS Prince 
of WalesN
How realistic do 
you think were British 
plans for the defence of 
Singapore and Malaya?
Think!
191
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?MALAYA
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 200) ---
SumatraSingaporeStraits of Melaka
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 201) ---
Artist’s impression of the final Japanese attack on HMS Prince of Wales
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 202) ---
HMS Prince of Wales and HMS Repulse (left) after being hit by 
Japanese torpedoes. One of their escorting warships can also be 
seen in the foreground.
 HMS Prince of Wales sinking
 The crew of HMS Prince of Wales abandoning ship
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 203) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
Japanese Plans and Strategies
Japanese Preparations for Invasion
Even before the outbreak of World War II, Japan had made preparations 
for a potential invasion of Malaya and Singapore. Japanese spies disguised 
as tourists or barbers helped to gather information for the military. The 
Japanese army also set up a special research unit to look into techniques
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 203) ---
for jungle fighting and the training of soldiers for the invasion of Malaya. A 
pamphlet on useful tips was written for these soldiers to read before the 
invasion (see Source 5).
When you encounter the enemy after landing, regard yourself as an avenger who has at last come face to face with his 
father’s murderer. Here before you is the man whose death will lighten your heart of its burden of brooding anger. If you
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 203) ---
fail to destroy him utterly, you can never rest at peace. And the first blow is the vital blow.
– An extract adapted from Read This Alone and the War Can Be Won,  
a pamphlet given to Japanese soldiers on their way to attack Malaya
1. What emotions do you think this pamphlet was trying to raise among the Japanese soldiers?
2. What does this tell you about the preparations that the Japanese made for the attack on Malaya and Singapore?SOURCE 5
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 203) ---
The head of the special research unit was Colonel Masanobu Tsuji. He was 
also the mastermind behind the attack on Malaya and Singapore. When 
the Japanese learnt from their spies about Singapore’s defences, Tsuji 
decided not to attack it from the sea. Instead, he planned for the Japanese 
invasion force to land on the beaches of southern Thailand and advance 
down Malaya to attack Singapore from the north. His plan was adopted 
and carried out during the actual invasion.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 203) ---
and carried out during the actual invasion.
Colonel Masanobu Tsuji Japanese soldiers in heavy camouflage advancing 
through the Malayan jungle, c. 1942 Japanese soldiers crossing a river in Malaya 
using an improvised bridge, c. 1942
1. What emotions do you think this pamphlet was trying to stir up among the Japanese soldiers?
2. What does this tell you about the preparations that the Japanese made for the attack on Malaya and Singapore?
194
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 204) ---
Japanese Forces
While the British forces defending Malaya and Singapore were mostly 
inexperienced, poorly trained and ill-equipped, many troops among the 
Japanese forces tasked with the invasion were experienced, battle-hardened 
and well-supported with weapons, aircraft, warships and tanks. They were 
led by General Tomoyuki Yamashita, a highly regarded commander. He was 
supported by young, capable and highly motivated officers.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 204) ---
The preparations made by the Japanese before the invasion proved to 
be valuable. Using their knowledge of the Malayan jungle, the Japanese 
brought light tanks and bicycles to move their soldiers around quickly.  
The soldiers were lightly equipped so that they could move fast and catch 
the enemy by surprise (read Source 6 on the next page to find out more 
about the differences between the Japanese and British forces).
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 204) ---
Japanese tanks in the Malayan jungle, 1942. The original photograph was in black and white. Colour has 
been added to it digitally in recent times to enhance its effect.
Who was  
GENERAL  
TOMOYUKI YAMASHITA?
?
Tomoyuki Y amashita (1885–1946),  
the son of a village doctor, had  
a distinguished military career even 
before the invasion of Malaya and 
Singapore. He graduated from the 
Imperial Japanese Army Academy  
in 1905, ranked 16th out of 920 officer
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 204) ---
in 1905, ranked 16th out of 920 officer 
cadets. Thereafter, Y amashita went 
through several postings and attained 
the rank of Major-General in 1934.
In 1936, Y amashita got involved in a 
failed attempt by some military officers 
to take over the government in Tokyo. 
He was banished to Korea as a result.  
He also spent time commanding 
troops in northern China and 
Manchuria.
After World War II broke out, 
Y amashita was sent to Italy and 
Germany, where he met Adolf Hitler.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 204) ---
Germany, where he met Adolf Hitler. 
Upon returning, he was posted to 
Manchuria as commander of an army 
there. In November 1941, he was 
appointed as commander of the newly 
formed 25th Army, tasked with the 
invasion of Malaya and Singapore. 
After the successful invasion of Malaya 
and Singapore in 
1942, Y amashita 
became known 
as the “Tiger of 
M a l a y a”.
During the invasion, Japanese control of the air and the sea gave them
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 204) ---
an advantage. Japanese fighters could support their troops on the ground 
and drop bombs on the defending forces. Japanese control of Indochina 
(present-day Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia) and the South China Sea also 
allowed them to launch more attacks and supply their troops without 
interference from the British.
195
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 205) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)However, the Japanese forces were severely outnumbered by the defending 
British forces. For that reason, Yamashita decided to depend on speed 
and surprise to overcome the British. During the battles for Malaya and 
Singapore, the British were repeatedly caught off guard by surprise attacks, 
retreating in haste to avoid being cut off from behind. As a result, they
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 205) ---
left behind large quantities of supplies, equipment and weapons that the 
Japanese took for their own use.
The majority [of the Japanese] were on bicycles, talking and laughing just as if they were going to a football match. 
They seemed to have no standard uniform or equipment and were travelling as light as they possibly could. The general 
impression was one of extraordinary determination. They had been ordered to go, and in their thousands they were going,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 205) ---
though their equipment was second-rate and much of it had obviously been acquired in Malaya.
[In comparison, the British soldiers were] equipped like Christmas trees so that they could hardly walk, much less fight.
– Adapted from an account by Freddie Spencer Chapman, 
a British soldier in Malaya during the invasion, published in 1963
1. Compare the descriptions of the Japanese and British soldiers. Which do you think was the more effective fighting 
force? Why?SOURCE 6
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 205) ---
force? Why?SOURCE 6
 Japanese soldiers using bicycles as a form of transport to move quickly through Malaya, c. 1942. The original photograph was in black and white. Colour has been 
added to it digitally in recent times to enhance its effect.
1. Compare the descriptions of the Japanese and British soldiers. Which do you think was the more effective fighting 
force? Why?The Japanese soldiers often referred to 
the supplies that they captured from 
the British as “Churchill supplies” .
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 205) ---
the British as “Churchill supplies” . 
Winston Churchill was the Prime 
Minister of Britain at the time of the 
Japanese invasion (see page 201 for 
more information on Churchill).DID YOU KNOW?
196
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 206) ---
Japanese soldiers landing in Kota Bahru, Malaya, 8 December 1941
 1940s Japanese postcard showing Japanese soldiers at Slim River. British troops suffered heavy casualties in this battle.How Did Malaya and 
Singapore Fall to the 
Japanese?
War came swiftly to Singapore. On 8 December 1941, 
Japanese troops landed in Singora and Patani in southern 
Thailand, and Kota Bahru in northern Malaya. They 
advanced rapidly through Malaya despite the efforts of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 206) ---
the defending forces. By 31 January 1942, the Japanese had 
seized Johor Bahru and were ready to invade Singapore.
 Map 5.4: The Japanese advance down Malaya
N
KuantanKota BahruJapanese landings
Kuala LumpurSlim RiverIpohButterworthSungei Patani
Penang 
IslandAlor StarJitraSingora
Patani
Gemas
Melaka
Muar
Parit Sulong Ayer Hitam
Johor BahruEndau
Mersing
JemaluangMALAYA
Straits of Melaka
SingaporeTHAILAND
South China Sea11–12 December 1941
7 January 1942
11 January 1942
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 206) ---
7 January 1942
11 January 1942
17 January 19428 December 1941
Legend
Major battle
Direction of Japanese advance(Courtesy of the National Archives of Malaysia: 1999/000269)
197
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 207) ---
794
62
27–30 January 1942
The Destruction  
of the Naval Base
The British decided to destroy 
the naval base to prevent  
the enemy from making use 
of its facilities. The loss of the 
famous naval base was one of 
the greatest military setbacks 
ever suffered by the British.1
1 February 1942
The Japanese Headquarters
General Yamashita set up his headquarters 
at the palace of the Sultan of Johor. This 
clever choice gave him a clear view of 
northern Singapore from the palace’s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 207) ---
northern Singapore from the palace’s 
five-storey tower. Although it was an easy 
target, Yamashita was confident that the 
British would not fire at the home of their 
old friend, the Sultan. He was right.2
8–9 February 1942
Landings in the Northwest
Japanese forces crossed the Straits of 
Johor in the northwest, where it was 
narrowest. Unsure of where the Japanese 
would attack, General Percival had spread 
his troops all along Singapore’s northern
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 207) ---
his troops all along Singapore’s northern 
coast. With too large an area to defend, the 
British forces could not stop the Japanese 
from securing a foothold on the island.4
5
7 February 1942
The Fake Attack
To trick the British, the 
Japanese bombarded the 
northeast of Singapore heavily 
and attacked Pulau Ubin. In 
response, the British moved 
troops and precious supplies 
such as petrol and explosives 
from the northwest to the 
northeast, just as the  
Japanese wanted.3
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 207) ---
northeast, just as the  
Japanese wanted.3
 Map 5.5: Events leading up to and during the Battle for Singapore, January–February 1942
9 February 1942
The British Blunder
The Japanese made quick repairs 
to the Causeway, which had been 
blown up by the British during 
their retreat. This allowed the 
Japanese to move more troops 
and equipment into Singapore. 
Meanwhile, Percival made plans 
to withdraw from the Kranji-
Jurong line to the city centre if 
necessary. Unfortunately, the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 207) ---
necessary. Unfortunately, the 
orders were misunderstood and 
some defending forces withdrew 
immediately, leaving the 
northwestern part of Singapore 
undefended. When the mistake 
was discovered, the British 
counter-attacked, but it was too 
late. By then, the Japanese had 
reached Bukit Timah.5
10–11 February 1942
The Battle of Bukit Timah
Bukit Timah was important as it held 
British supplies of food, ammunition and 
spare parts. It also faced a reservoir, which
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 207) ---
spare parts. It also faced a reservoir, which 
was a vital source of water supply. Fierce 
fighting took place here. Armed only with 
swords, grenades and small rifles, Chinese 
volunteers fought bravely alongside the 
defending forces. The Japanese later took 
revenge by killing all the Chinese men, 
women and children in the nearby village.6
 Japanese soldiers at Bukit Timah Hill, 10 February 1942N
Ford Motor 
FactoryTengah AirfieldCauseway
Bukit TimahJohor
Kranji RiverStraits of Johor
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 207) ---
Bukit TimahJohor
Kranji RiverStraits of Johor
Pasir Panjang RidgeSultan’s Palace
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 208) ---
1
83
The Battle for
Singapore
15 February 1942
The Bluff That Worked
Later that day, Percival met Yamashita  
at the Ford Motor Factory in Bukit Timah. 
Yamashita demanded immediate 
surrender by the British. Under pressure, 
Percival agreed. Unknown to him, the 
Japanese were also desperately short 
of ammunition and men, and might not 
have been able to carry on fighting much 
longer. Yamashita’s bluff had worked.  
The battle for Singapore was over.9
13–14 February 1942
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 208) ---
13–14 February 1942
The Battle of Pasir Panjang
The Japanese reached Pasir Panjang 
Ridge (present-day Kent Ridge Park), close 
to the Alexandra area where the main 
British ammunition stores and military 
hospital were located. It was defended by 
the Malay Regiment, including Lieutenant 
Adnan bin Saidi. The Japanese attacked 
and surrounded the hill. Fierce fighting 
took place, with many killed on both sides. 
However, the Malay Regiment was heavily
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 208) ---
However, the Malay Regiment was heavily 
outnumbered and was eventually defeated. 7
 Men from the Malay Regiment at bayonet practice, 
October 1941
15 February 1942
Decision at Fort Canning
On the first day of the Lunar New  
British commanders met at the 
underground bunker at Fort Canning. 
Percival wanted to counter-attack,  
but his commanders were against it.  
The soldiers were exhausted. Their 
supplies of food, water and ammunition 
were running out. The prospect of street
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 208) ---
were running out. The prospect of street 
fighting meant more casualties. To avoid 
further bloodshed, the British decided  
to surrender.8
 Wax figurines in Battlebox showing Percival (centre of table, 
standing) and his senior officers discussing Singapore’s 
surrender on the morning of 15 February 1942Year,LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how Singapore fell  
to the Japanese @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc502 .
Who was  
LIEUTENANT  
ADNAN BIN SAIDI?
Before the war, Adnan bin Saidi (1915–1942)
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 208) ---
Before the war, Adnan bin Saidi (1915–1942) 
was a trainee teacher in Malaya. He joined the 
Malay Regiment when it was set up by the British 
in 1933. An excellent soldier, he was voted best 
recruit and eventually became a Lieutenant. 
During the Japanese invasion of Singapore, 
Lieutenant Adnan and the Malay Regiment  
fought bravely to defend Pasir Panjang.  
Despite being wounded, 
Lieutenant Adnan refused to 
yield and kept on fighting. He 
was later captured and killed
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 208) ---
was later captured and killed 
by the Japanese. The motto he 
chose for his men said, “It is 
better to die in battle than to live 
with tears of regret. ”
?
Sembawang Naval Base
Fort CanningSembawang Airfield
Kallang AirportSeletar Airfield
Pulau Blakang MatiSeletar Reservoir
Peirce Reservoir
MacRitchie ReservoirJohor 
Pulau Ubin
Changi
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 209) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)Earlier in the chapter (see page 174), you learnt that historians 
sometimes look at the causes of a historical event in different ways. 
In doing so, they may ask whether the event would necessarily have 
happened given the particular set of factors at that time, or whether 
things could have turned out differently if the initial conditions or 
factors had been different.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 209) ---
factors had been different. 
In the case of the fall of Singapore, one way is to look at whether 
the defeat could have been prevented or avoided by examining the 
causes in terms of:
• the international context (e.g., the war in Europe);
• the circumstances in which the battles for Malaya and Singapore 
were fought (e.g., the readiness and preparations of the British 
and Japanese forces); and
• the choices and decisions of the military and political leaders
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 209) ---
(e.g., Churchill, Percival and Yamashita).Conclusion
The fall of Singapore has been 
described as the worst military 
disaster ever suffered by the British. 
Numerous books have examined the 
reasons for the defeat and whether 
it could have been avoided. Having 
studied this chapter, would you agree 
that Singapore was doomed to fall?
In the international context, the 
British were fighting a major war, 
not just in Asia, but also in Europe 
and North Africa. With their limited
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 209) ---
and North Africa. With their limited 
resources, the British simply could 
not defend every place with all their 
might. On the other hand, with the 
United States rebuilding its forces 
after the attack on Pearl Harbor, 
the Japanese were able to focus on 
attacking Southeast Asia. Given this, 
it is clear that the Japanese held 
the advantage over the British in 
Southeast Asia.
  Surrender negotiations at the Ford Motor Factory, 15 February 1942BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CAUSATION
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 209) ---
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
200
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 210) ---
For British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, the defence of Britain itself 
was more important than the defence of its colonies in Asia, including 
Singapore. This meant that fewer resources were made available for the 
defence of Singapore. Thus, British commanders in Malaya and Singapore 
had to make do with what they had, which was mostly inferior to what the 
Japanese forces had. To make matters worse, the defenders were under-
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 210) ---
prepared to resist the Japanese invasion, due to poor planning and training. 
On the other side, the Japanese forces were well-prepared and equipped. 
These circumstances, combined with the international context of the war 
mentioned earlier, made the defence of Singapore a very difficult, if not 
impossible, task.
Finally, what about the roles of key individuals? Could Singapore have  
been saved if Churchill had sent more troops and weapons? What if
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 210) ---
General Percival had been a better commander, or General Yamashita  
a worse one? As Prime Minister, Churchill had to prioritise the defence of 
Britain over that of its colonies. It might be unreasonable to expect him 
to allocate more resources to Singapore when Britain was fighting for 
its own survival. Furthermore, it is doubtful whether more resources or  
a better commander of the British forces could have made a significant
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 210) ---
difference, given the odds stacked against them. On the Japanese side, a less  
competent commander than Yamashita might have taken longer to 
conquer Singapore or at a higher cost, but he most probably would still have  
managed it in the end.
The fall of Singapore marked a new chapter in the island’s history: 123 years 
of continuous British rule had been disrupted. The people in Singapore 
looked to the dawn of Japanese rule with uncertainty, anxiety and fear.Who was  
WINSTON CHURCHILL?
?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 210) ---
WINSTON CHURCHILL?
?
Winston Churchill (1874–1965), the 
descendant of a famous 18th-century 
English general, had a brief military 
career before becoming a Member 
of Parliament in 1900. He then held 
many important posts in the British 
government up to 1929. 
Churchill was one of the few British 
politicians to recognise the dangers 
Hitler posed to Europe and the British 
Empire. He became Prime Minister 
of Britain in May 1940 and refused to 
surrender to Germany. His brilliant
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 210) ---
surrender to Germany. His brilliant 
speeches, strong determination and 
tireless efforts inspired and sustained 
the British people towards eventual 
victory in the war. 
Churchill later wrote an 
acclaimed history of the 
war and was awarded 
the Nobel Prize for 
Literature in 1953 in 
recognition of his 
achievements.
 Japanese troops celebrating the capture of Singapore, February 1942. The original photograph was in black and white. Colour has been added to it digitally in recent
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 210) ---
times to enhance its effect.
201
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 211) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)Here are some factors that contributed to the fall of Singapore. Based 
on what you have learnt in this chapter, group them into the following 
categories:
• international context;
• historical actors; and
• local circumstances.
How are these factors connected to one another? Draw a graphic 
organiser to link them. Some examples have been done for you.
The war in 
Europe
International 
Context
Historical  
Actors 
Local
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 211) ---
Context
Historical  
Actors 
Local 
CircumstancesChurchill Percival
British 
defenceBritish defence Japanese forcesThe war  
in EuropeThe sinking 
of Force Z
Japan’s attack 
on Pearl HarborYamashita Percival Churchill
influenced the 
decisions of
reduced resources 
available forlimited choices 
and actions forheld overall 
command overLEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how historians 
categorise  
historical causes @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc503.
LET’S REVIEW
202
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 212) ---
As the overall commander of the British forces defending Singapore, General Percival received much 
criticism for his role in the military disaster. After surrendering Singapore to the Japanese, Percival joined 
many of his troops as a prisoner of war. At the end of the war, he was released and attended the ceremony 
marking the formal surrender of the Japanese. Thereafter, he retired from military service and returned to
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 212) ---
Britain, where he wrote an account of the Malayan campaign. Unlike other British military officers who 
retired with the rank of Lieutenant-General, Percival was not awarded a knighthood (an honour usually 
awarded to people who have provided exceptional service to the country).
There are many differing views about Percival. Some feel he was a poor commander who made too many 
crucial mistakes. Others argue that he was simply a convenient scapegoat (person to blame) for the military
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 212) ---
disaster. How far was Percival to blame for the fall of Singapore? Read the sources that follow and carry out 
the investigation to decide for yourself.
A courageous, compassionate and intelligent soldier of great integrity, Percival was not a born leader and field commander, 
and he was slow to adapt to changed circumstances. While he impressed many people who knew him well, Percival lacked
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 212) ---
the ability to command people’s attention. Slight in build, he appeared shy and oversensitive, while his calm manner could 
easily be mistaken for disinterest and weakness.
– A description of General Percival, adapted from a book by British historian Constance Mary Turnbull, published in 2009SOURCE A
 General Percival (extreme right) with war reporters 
in Singapore, late January 1942Was General Percival to blame for the fall of Singapore?CASE INVESTIGATION
203
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 212) ---
203
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 213) ---
SINGAPORE’S DEVELOPMENT AS A PORT CITY UNDER THE BRITISH (1819–1942)
SOURCE D
ForcesMalaya Command  
(General Percival)25th Army  
(General Yamashita)
Combat Troops 87,000 55,000
Tanks 0 80
Aircraft 150–250 550–600
Warships 4 11 
Many of the causes which contributed to our defeat in Malaya and Singapore had a common origin, namely the  
British Empire’s lack of readiness for war. Our shortage in ships, aircraft and tanks, the inexperience of our leaders, and
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 213) ---
the lack of training of our troops, can all be attributed to a failure to prepare for war. In 1941, when the crisis came, it was 
too late to put things right. By that time, we were engaged in a life and death struggle in the West, and war material which 
might have saved Singapore was sent elsewhere. The choice was made and Singapore had to suffer. In my opinion this 
decision, however painful and regrettable, was unavoidable and right.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 213) ---
– An extract adapted from General Percival’s memoirs, published in 1949SOURCE C
Percival was certainly treated unfairly by those who came after him. His personal bravery, ability as a staff officer and 
genuine concern for the welfare of his troops are all beyond dispute. Percival was given an impossible plan. By making 
whatever changes he could, he might have delayed, but not prevented, the fall of Singapore. He certainly lacked charisma,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 213) ---
and the gift of inspiring men to the highest pitch of heroism and determination. Percival was unfortunate that he was 
given responsibilities far beyond his capabilities, and he lacked the ability to inspire and lead.
– An evaluation of Percival, adapted from a book by military historians Richard Holmes and Anthony Kemp, published in 1982SOURCE B
 Table showing the estimated British and Japanese forces deployed in Malaya and Singapore as of 7 December 1941
204
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 214) ---
1. Read Sources A and B. How similar are they in telling you about Percival’s leadership?
2. Examine Sources A to D. Group the sources according to whether or not they support the claim that 
Percival was to blame for the fall of Singapore. How do these sources differ in their view of Percival’s 
role in the British defeat?
After reading the sources, note down the key points on whether Percival was to blame for the fall of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 214) ---
Singapore in the table below. Provide evidence from the sources to support the key points. An example has 
been done for you. After that, write your conclusion in the last row.
Percival Was to Blame Percival Was Not to Blame
Percival was not an inspiring leader. According 
to Source A, he “was not a born leader and field 
commander”. He also “lacked the ability to  
command people’s attention”.
 My conclusion is ...INVESTIGATE!
REPORT!
205
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 214) ---
My conclusion is ...INVESTIGATE!
REPORT!
205
DID SINGAPORE HAVE TO FALL TO THE JAPANESE IN WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the following for permission to use copyright materials:Acknowledgements
i Cavenagh Bridge, 2018 © Phuong D. Nguyen/Shutterstock.com. ii Cavenagh Bridge, c. 1900 © Gretchen Liu Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 
viii–ix Detail from Town and Harbour of Singapore by William Farquhar, 1825 © FLHC 96/ Alamy Stock Photo. x–xi View of Singapore from Government Hill
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
(present-day Fort Canning Hill) by John Turnbull Thomson, 1846 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 3  Background © 
BongkarnGraphic/Shutterstock.com. Book © Romolo Tavani/Shutterstock.com. Magical light © StarLine/Shutterstock.com. Glass globules © John N. Miksic. Kris © 
Taksina/Shutterstock.com. Chinese Tang and Song dynasty coins © John N. Miksic. Paddle earthenware shards © John N. Miksic. 4  Rickshaw, 19th century © Courtesy
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Chettiar marriage necklace, 19th century © Collection of Asian Civilisations Museum. 5  Drawing of 
Chinatown and Thian Hock Keng Temple by Marie Fauconnier, 1910, published in Geneviève Fauconnier (1932), Micheline à Bord du Nibong (Paris: J. de Gigord). © 
Marie Fauconnier. Map showing the region around Singapore and Johor by Manuel Godinho de Erédia, 1613 © Discripsão chorographica dos estreitos de Sincapura
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
e Sabbam. Ano. 1604, from Malaca, L’Inde Orientale et le Cathay, page 61, Manuel Godinho de Erédia (1563–1623), Brussels, 1881–1882, Collection of National 
Library, Singapore (Accession no.: B03013605G). Landing permit of a Chinese migrant, 1934 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 
Sejarah Melayu ( Sulalat al-Salatin), edited by Munshi Abdullah, Singapore, 1840 © Image reproduced from National Library Board (2019), On Paper: Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
before 1867 (Singapore: National Library Board) (Call no.: RSING 959.5703 ON-[HIS]). 7  View of South Bridge Road by Peter Bernhard Wilhelm Heine, 1860 © Courtesy 
of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 10 Vintage paper background © Sk_Advance studio/Shutterstock.com. Map showing the region around 
Singapore and Johor by Manuel Godinho de Erédia, 1613 © Discripsão chorographica dos estreitos de Sincapura e Sabbam. Ano. 1604, from Malaca, L’Inde
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Orientale et le Cathay, p. 61, Manuel Godinho de Erédia (1563–1623), Brussels, 1881–1882, Collection of National Library, Singapore [Accession no.: B03013605G]. 
Dutch illustration of the Orang Laut (A Melaya Captain), 17th century © Reproduced by Special Collections, National University of Singapore Libraries. Majapahit-
style headless horseman, 14th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Hornbill casque © Frank Blackburn/ Alamy Stock
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Photo. Ivory © My name is boy/Shutterstock.com. Cotton © mykeyruna/Shutterstock.com. Chinese pottery, 17th century © John N. Miksic. Spices © baibaz/
Shutterstock.com. Sejarah Melayu ( Sulalat al-Salatin), edited by Munsyi Abdullah, Singapore, 1840 © Image reproduced from National Library Board (2019), On 
Paper: Singapore before 1867 (Singapore: National Library Board) (Call no.: RSING 959.5703 ON-[HIS]). 11 National Day Parade rehearsal, 2009 © Jordan Tan/
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Shutterstock.com. Containers in Singapore’s port, 2015 © Delpixel/Shutterstock.com. Skyline of Singapore © joyfull/Shutterstock.com. 12 Bronze statue from the 
Srivijayan period © Mark Brandon/Shutterstock.com. 13 Vasco da Gama © GL Archive/ Alamy Stock Photo. Battle for Melaka between the VOC fleet and the 
Portuguese, 1606, courtesy of Atlas of Mutual Heritage and Koninklijke Bibliotheek/Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AMH-6472-
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
KB_Battle_for_Malacca_between_the_VOC_fleet_and_the_Portuguese,_1606.jpg. View of Batavia by Jan van Ryne, c. 1754, courtesy of Royal Netherlands Institute 
of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies. 15 Emperor Taizu, courtesy of National Palace Museum. Queen Victoria © Everett Collection/Shutterstock.com. Chinese 
lunar calendar © Sofiaworld/Shutterstock.com. 16 Turtle shell © HelloRF Zcool/Shutterstock.com. Ceramic vase, courtesy of The Cleveland Museum of Art. Silk ©
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Collection of Asian Civilisations Museum. Spices © baibaz/Shutterstock.com. Scented wood © JurateBuiviene/Shutterstock.com. 20–21 View of Batavia by Jan van 
Ryne, c. 1754, courtesy of Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies. 25 Cotton © mykeyruna/Shutterstock.com. Ivory © My name is 
boy/Shutterstock.com. Sea cucumbers © gowithstock/Shutterstock.com. Hornbill casque © Frank Blackburn/ Alamy Stock Photo. Daoyi Zhilue© Reproduced by
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Special Collections, National University of Singapore Libraries. Chinese ceramics, 13th–15th century © John N. Miksic. 27 Map showing the region around Singapore 
and Johor by Manuel Godinho de Erédia, 1613 © Discripsão chorographica dos estreitos de Sincapura e Sabbam. Ano. 1604, from Malaca, L’Inde Orientale et le 
Cathay, page 61, Manuel Godinho de Erédia (1563–1623), Brussels, 1881–1882, Collection of National Library, Singapore [Accession no.: B03013605G]. Tree rings ©
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Billion Photos/Shutterstock.com. 28 Blue and white stem cup fragment, 14th century © Collection of Asian Civilisations Museum. Gold earrings and armlet, mid-
14th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Glass beads, 14th century © John N. Miksic. 29 White stem cup, 12th–14th 
century © John N. Miksic. Dehua plate fragment, 14th century © John N. Miksic. Mercury jar, 14th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Heritage Board. Ceramic shards, 19th century © John N. Miksic. Majapahit-style headless horseman, 14th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, 
National Heritage Board. 32  Dutch illustration of the Orang Laut (A Melaya Captain), 17th century © Reproduced by Special Collections, National University of 
Singapore Libraries. Floral motif carving on the main door of Tranquerah Mosque, Melaka © ID 51709444 © Aisyaqilumar | Dreamstime.com. 33  Christopher Columbus
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
© Everett Collection/Shutterstock.com. Vasco da Gama © GL Archive/ Alamy Stock Photo. 34 Francis Xavier © Kobe City Museum. Cavalry Battle Between Dutch 
and Spanish Troops by Jan Martszen de Jonge, 17th century © Zuri Swimmer/ Alamy Stock Photo. 35 Sejarah Melayu ( Sulalat al-Salatin), edited by Munsyi Abdullah, 
Singapore, 1840 © Image reproduced from National Library Board (2019), On Paper: Singapore before 1867 (Singapore: National Library Board) (Call no.: RSING
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
959.5703 ON-[HIS]). Suma Oriental, courtesy of Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal. 36 Chinese porcelain, 17th century © John N. Miksic. Map showing the region 
around Singapore and Johor by Manuel Godinho de Erédia, 1613 © Discripsão chorographica dos estreitos de Sincapura e Sabbam. Ano. 1604, from Malaca, L’Inde 
Orientale et le Cathay, p. 61, Manuel Godinho de Erédia (1563–1623), Brussels, 1881–1882, Collection of National Library, Singapore [Accession no.: B03013605G]. East
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Indiamen of the Coast by Hendrick Cornelisz Vroom, early 17th century, courtesy of Rijksmuseum. 39  Map depicting a battle between the Portuguese and the 
Dutch in 1603 by the De Brys © Collection of National Library, Singapore. [Accession no.: B18835268H]. Source A © Kwa Chong Guan, Derek Heng and Tan Tai Yong 
(2009), Singapore: A 700-Year History (Singapore: National Archives of Singapore). 40 Source B © Peter Borschberg (2014), The Memoirs and Memorials of Jacques
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
de Coutre: Security, Trade and Society in 16th- and 17th- Century Southeast Asia (Singapore: NUS Press). Source C © Peter Borschberg (2016), Admiral Matelieff’s 
Singapore and Johor, 1606–1616 (Singapore: NUS Press). Source D © Peter Borschberg (2016), Admiral Matelieff’s Singapore and Johor, 1606–1616 (Singapore: NUS 
Press). 42 View of Singapore River and Chinatown from Government Hill, 1824 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Plan of the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Town of Singapore by Lieutenant Philip Jackson © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 43  Chart of the Straits of Singapore by 
James Horsburgh, 1806 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 44 East India House in London, 1817 © Courtesy of National Museum 
of Singapore, National Heritage Board. VOC’s headquarters in Amsterdam, c. 1760s, courtesy of Gemeente Amsterdam Stadsarchief. Sir Stamford Raffles © National
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
Portrait Gallery, London. 45 Dr John Crawfurd © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 46 EIC’s coat of arms © INTERFOTO/ Alamy 
Stock Photo. 47  Cinnamon © Nata-Lia/Shutterstock.com. Cloves © Pairoj Sroyngern/Shutterstock.com. Nutmeg © Rustam Bikulov/Shutterstock.com. Mace © 
Madlen/Shutterstock.com. Fort Belgica in the Maluku Islands © Stephane Bidouze/Shutterstock.com. 48 VOC’s company logo, courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 215) ---
View of Batavia by Hendrick Dubbels, c. 1650, courtesy of Rijksmuseum. 50 Letter by Stamford Raffles, 14 April 1818 © Kwa Chong Guan, Derek Heng and Tan Tai 
Yong (2009), Singapore: A 700-Year History (Singapore: National Archives of Singapore). 54 Source 1 © C. M. Turnbull (2009), A History of Modern Singapore,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
1819–2005 (Singapore: NUS Press). 55 Source 2 © John Sturgus Bastin (2014), Raffles and Hastings: Private Exchanges Behind the Founding of Singapore (Singapore: 
Marshal Cavendish Editions and National Library Board). 57  Pages of the 1819 Treaty © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 58 
Detail from Article 12 of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty, 17 March 1824, courtesy of Nationaal Archief. 59 Map used at the final negotiations of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
London between December 1823 and March 1824 with pencil line made by Anton Reinhard Falck, courtesy of Nationaal Archief. 60 Page from a copy of the 1824 
Treaty of Friendship and Alliance © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 61  Silver epergne given to Farquhar by the Chinese in Singapore © Courtesy of 
National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 62  Sir Stamford Raffles © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Illustration
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
of the first botanical and experimental garden in Singapore, 1840 © SOAS Library; Charles H. Savory (1840), Six Views of Singapore and Macao: From Drawings 
Made on the Spot in 1840 (London: Ackermann & Co). Hokkien Street, 1890s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Commercial 
Square, c. 1910, courtesy of Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies. 63  Chulia Street, c. 1900 © Courtesy of National Museum of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Singapore, National Heritage Board. Singapore Cricket Club, Singapore (Ref: PA5-0357), courtesy of Alexander Turnbull Library, Wellington, New Zealand. Bras Basah 
Road, c. 1905 © Collection of Singapore Philatelic Museum. Postcard donated by Prof Cheah Jin Seng. Sultan Mosque, c. 1930 © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy 
of National Archives of Singapore. 64 Dr John Crawfurd © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Illustration inside John Crawfurd’s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Journal of an Embassy from the Governor-General of India to the Courts of Siam and Cochin China, published in 1828 © Collection of National Library, Singapore. 
[Accession no.: B20116740J]. 66 Sir Stamford Raffles © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Dr John Crawfurd © Courtesy of 
National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 67  Statue of Stamford Raffles in Westminster Abbey, London © The Dean and Chapter of Westminster.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Source B © Demetrius Charles Boulger (1999), The Life of Sir Stamford Raffles (Amsterdam: The Pepin Press): reproduced in this publication by CPDD, MOE, 
published in January 2021, on behalf of and for the educational purposes of Singapore schools and educational institutions funded by the Singapore Government. 
68 Source C © Nadia H. Wright (2017), William Farquhar and Singapore: Stepping out from Raffles’ Shadow (Penang: Entrepot Publishing Sdn Bhd), p. 215. Memorial
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
to William Farquhar in Perth, Scotland © https://www.findagrave.com/user/profile/49068164. 69  Source E © Ernest Chew, http://www.postcolonialweb.org/
singapore/history/chew/chew13.html. Source F © C. M. Turnbull (2009), A History of Modern Singapore, 1819–2005 (Singapore: NUS Press). 71  Outline of statue © 
Elena Serebryakova/Shutterstock.com. Plinth © Rob van Esch/Shutterstock.com. Plinth © sumkinn/Shutterstock.com. White marble texture © ParinPix/
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Shutterstock.com. 72 Commercial Square, c. 1910, courtesy of Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies. Sri Mariamman Temple, 1938 
© Allen Goh Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Chinese women to market, c. 1939 © Collection of Singapore Philatelic Museum. Postcard 
donated by Prof Cheah Jin Seng. Clog seller © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Coffee seller © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Heritage Board. Rickshaw puller and his passenger, c. 1890–c. 1910, courtesy of Rijksmuseum. Samsui woman working at a construction yard © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board.  72–73 View of Singapore from Mount Wallich by Percy Carpenter, 1856 © Courtesy of National Museum of 
Singapore, National Heritage Board. The Chinese Protectorate © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 73 Sultan Mosque, 1930s ©
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. View of High Street, 1920s © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Rubber tapping 
© Collection of Singapore Philatelic Museum. Postcard donated by Mr Koh Seow Chuan. Lim Nee Soon with his lorry loaded with pineapples © Lim Chong Hsien 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Chettiar moneylender © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Malay
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Regiment at bayonet practice, 1941 © Imperial War Museum. 74 View of Singapore from Mount Wallich by Percy Carpenter, 1856 © Courtesy of National Museum 
of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Chinese Protectorate © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Opening of the Suez Canal, 
1869 © INTERFOTO/ Alamy Stock Photo. Girls at the Convent of the Holy Infant Jesus, 1926 © Sisters of the Infant Jesus Collection, courtesy of National Archives
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
of Singapore. Legislative Council members, 1873 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Health examination at Singapore Quarantine Station, St John’s Island 
© National Archives, United Kingdom. Rubber tapping © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 75 Painting by Robert Wilson 
Wilber of Singapore’s busy harbour, with Fort Canning Hill in the background, 1849 © Robert Wilson Wiber, Panoramic View of Singapore from the Harbour, 1849.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Watercolour and gouache on paper, 33 x 67 cm. Collection of National Gallery Singapore. 76 East India House in London, 1817 © Courtesy of National Museum of 
Singapore, National Heritage Board. Opening of the third dock at the New Harbour, 1869 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 
77 Opening of the Suez Canal, 1869 © INTERFOTO/ Alamy Stock Photo. Health examination at Singapore Quarantine Station, St John’s Island © National Archives,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
United Kingdom. William Pickering © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 78  1909–1910 Ford Model T Touring Car, courtesy of Alpha Stock/ Alamy Stock 
Photo. The first tin smelter on Pulau Brani © Collection of Jerome Lim. Secret society members, 1900s © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Henry Ridley 
© courtesy of The Garden’s Bulletin, Vol. IX, Part 1/Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:H_N_Ridley.jpg. 79  British soldiers with anti-
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
gas helmets © Imperial War Museum. Poor mother and children, Oklahoma, by Dorothea Lange, 1936 © Library of Congress. The Causeway, c. 1925 © Courtesy of 
National Archives of Singapore. British troops surrendering to the Japanese © FLHC 86/ Alamy Stock Photo. 80 Construction crane © matsabe/Shutterstock.com. 
83 Victorian sterling silver and engraved crystal centrepiece © ID 154785674 © Miroslava Hanusova | Dreamstime.com. Cotton fabric © Anastasia Badmaeva/
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Shutterstock.com. Chinese black tea © leungchopan/Shutterstock.com. Spices © kuvona/Shutterstock.com. 87  China Street, 1890s © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Opium den, late 19th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. View of 
Singapore from Mount Wallich by Percy Carpenter, 1856 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 88 Illustration by Thomas Hosmer
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Shepherd showing the interior of the headquarters of the EIC at Leadenhall Street in London, 1820 © Science Photo Library/ Alamy Stock Photo. 89  Source 1 © L. A. 
Mills (1965), British Malaya, 1824–67 (Singapore: Nanyang Printers Limited): reproduced in this publication by CPDD, MOE, published in January 2021, on behalf of 
and for the educational purposes of Singapore schools and educational institutions funded by the Singapore Government. Legislative Council members, 1873 ©
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 90 Whitehall in London, 1866 © Illustrated London News Ltd/Mary Evans. 91 Central Police Station, 1869 © Courtesy 
of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 92  Illustration showing a policeman with two thieves, c. 1890s © Courtesy of National Museum of 
Singapore, National Heritage Board. Tanjong Pagar Police Station, 1880 © Morgan Betty Bassett Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 93  Officers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
from the Detective Branch, 1906 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 94 Model of a Chinese migrant ship at Fuk Tak Chi Museum © Singapore Travel Hub. 
95 Diorama at Fuk Tak Chi Museum showing migrants at work © Foong Zee Kin. 96 Chinese coolie, early–mid 20th century © Courtesy of National Museum of 
Singapore, National Heritage Board. 97  Boat arriving in Singapore with Chinese coolies, c. 1900 © Hsu Chung-mao. Source 2 © “Report of Pickering on Kidnapping
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 216) ---
of Sinkehs” (February 1877, Appendix 1) in Straits Settlements Legislative Council Proceedings of 1877. Source 3 © “Report of Pickering on Kidnapping of Sinkehs”
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
(February 1877, Appendix 1) in Straits Settlements Legislative Council Proceedings of 1877. 98 Receipts for contribution to Ghee Hin Kongsi, late 19th century © 
Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Ghee Hin Kongsi seal, c. 1920s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National 
Heritage Board. Headline published on 25 July 1974 in The New Nation. Source: New Nation © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 100
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Illustration of Ghee Hin Kongsi lodge, late 19th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 101 “Fuji” Japanese Restaurant 
postcard, c. 1920 © Collection of Singapore Philatelic Museum. Postcard donated by Prof Cheah Jin Seng. Chinese woman holding a pipa © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 102  William Pickering © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Chinese Protectorate © Courtesy of National
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 104 Iranun pirate, 19th century, courtesy of University of Cambridge. 106 Raffles Institution, c. 1900 © Courtesy of 
National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 107  Anglo-Tamil School, c. 1880s © Morgan Betty Bassett Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. The Chinese High School, c. 1938 © Lee Brothers Studio Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Music class at Convent of the Holy Infant
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Jesus, 1924 © Sisters of the Infant Jesus Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 108 Night-soil carriers, c. late 19th century © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Chinatown, c. 1930 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 109 The General 
Hospital, early 20th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Health examination at Singapore Quarantine Station, St John’s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Island © National Archives, United Kingdom. Typical shophouse in Chinatown, c. 1907, courtesy of Wellcome Library. Rickshaw pullers and labourers living in a 
shophouse, c. 1941 © Carl Mydans: Opium Den, http://www.icp.org. 111 Opening of the third dock at the New Harbour, 1869 © Courtesy of National Museum of 
Singapore, National Heritage Board. 112 Local youths diving for coins at the New Harbour, 1872 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Board. Façade of Tanjong Pagar Railway Station, c. 1932 © Mrs J. A. Bennett Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. The Causeway, c. 1925 © Courtesy 
of National Archives of Singapore. 114 Opening of the Suez Canal, 1869 © INTERFOTO/ Alamy Stock Photo. 115 Coolies coaling a steamship at the Singapore harbour, 
1900s © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. View of a steamship docking at a coaling station in New Harbour, 1876 © Courtesy of National Museum of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Singapore, National Heritage Board. 116 Highland Brand Evaporated Cream, courtesy of Boston Public Library. Tin mining in Perak, Malaya, c. 1910s © Nationaal 
Archief, Den Haag, Deli Maatschappij, nummer toegang 2.20.46, inventarisnummer 844. 117 Seah Eng Kiong’s pineapple tinning factory at Bendemeer, Singapore, 
1908 (Fisher 18/4204) © Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library. View from Mount Faber showing Pulau Brani and Pulau
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Blakang Mati, 1900s © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 118 1909–1910 Ford Model T Touring Car, courtesy of Alpha Stock/ Alamy Stock Photo. Rubber 
seeds © Grey Carnation/Shutterstock.com. Rubber tapping © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Turning latex into rubber 
sheets, c. 1900s, courtesy of Nationaal Archief, The Hague. 119 Henry Ridley at the Singapore Botanic Gardens, c. 1905 © Collection of Singapore Philatelic Museum.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Postcard donated by Prof Cheah Jin Seng. Henry Ridley © courtesy of The Garden’s Bulletin, Vol. IX, Part 1/Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:H_N_Ridley.jpg. Raw rubber arriving at London docks, c. 1900s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 122 Rubber export 
coupon, 1922–1941 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Source 4 © Dr Loh Kah Seng (Mar 2006), “Beyond Rubber Prices:
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Negotiating the Great Depression in Singapore” , from South East Asia Research (Vol. 14, No. 1) (Singapore: Sage Publications). 123 Landing permit, 1932 © Courtesy 
of the National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Gift of Ms Theresa Low. Certificate of Admission for Overseas Chinese © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Gift of Tan See Fang. Landing permit of a Chinese immigrant, 1934 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
National Heritage Board. 124–125 Singapore River looking towards Fort Canning (RCSPC-Y30311B-002) © M. H. Blamey, reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics 
of Cambridge University Library. 125 Boat Quay and Empress Place buildings, 1920s © Courtesy of the National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Gift 
of Ms Ng Chee Sun. 126 Boat Quay, 1840s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Boat Quay, 1860s © Courtesy of National Museum
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 126–127 Present-day Boat Quay © ID 153029847 © jimmytst | Dreamstime.com. Boat Quay, 1880s © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Boat Quay, 1907 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 127 Boat Quay, early 20th 
century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Boat Quay aerial view, 1967 © Urban Redevelopment Authority. 129 Source B ©
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Maurice Freedman (Oct 1960), “Immigrants and Associations: Chinese in Nineteenth-Century Singapore” , from Comparative Studies in Society and History (Vol. 3, 
No. 1) (United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press). 130 Source C © John Cameron (1965), Our Tropical Possessions in Malayan India (Malaysia: Oxford Fajar Sdn 
Bhd): reproduced in this publication by CPDD, MOE, published in January 2021, on behalf of and for the educational purposes of Singapore schools and educational
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
institutions funded by the Singapore Government. Source D © C. M. Turnbull (2009), A History of Modern Singapore, 1819–2005 (Singapore: NUS Press). Source E 
© Eunice Thio (1960), “The Singapore Chinese Protectorate – Events and Conditions Leading to its Establishment, 1823–1877” , from Journal of the South Seas Society  
(Vol. XVI, Parts 1 & 2). 132  Rickshaw puller with a European passenger and an attendant © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Samsui woman © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Chinese street traders, c. 1920s © Courtesy of National Museum of 
Singapore, National Heritage Board. Indian labour foreman, c. 1905 © Arshak C. Galstaun Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Indian couple, 
1800s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Malay hawker, c. 1907 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Gan Eng Seng ©
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Gan Eng Seng School Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Bugis sailor, 1950s © Lee Kip Lin collection, National Library Board, Singapore. Coolie, 
1900s © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Eunos Abdullah, c. 1930 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Indian 
coolies repairing a road, c. 1910 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Chinese family, 1920s © Courtesy of National Archives of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Singapore. Chettiar moneylender © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Eurasian family, c. 1910 © Lee Brothers Studio Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr Lim Boon Keng, c. 1890s © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. European children, 1930 © Mrs J. A. Bennett 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Edward Boustead © Courtesy of Boustead Singapore Limited. Tan Tock Seng, c. 1840 © Margaret Tan
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Chinese street barber c. 1900 © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 
Tan Kim Seng, c. 1850s © Collection of Asian Civilisations Museum. Boyanese, 1910 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Syed Mohamed bin Ahmed 
Alsagoff © Madrasah Alsagoff Al-Arabiah. Straits Chinese British Association first committee, c. 1900 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Trengganu
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Street, Singapore by Hugo Vilfred Pedersen, c. 1897 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 133  Samsui women working at a 
construction site, late 1930s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 134 Raffles Institution, 1890s © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Pupils at the Church of England Zenana Missionary Society School © Courtesy of St Margaret’s Secondary School,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 217) ---
Singapore. Painting showing the Chinese Pauper Hospital on Pearl’s Hill by John Turnbull Thomson, 1848 © John Turnbull Thomson (1821–1884), Chinese and Seamans
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Hospitals, Singapore, 1847, watercolour on paper: 292mm x 451mm, 92/122, given by the Hall-Jones family, 1992, Hocken Collections, Uare Taoka o Hā kena, University 
of Otago. 135 Poor mother and children, Oklahoma, by Dorothea Lange, 1936 © Library of Congress. Thong Chai Medical Institution, 1890s © Gretchen Liu Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Alsagoff Arab School, 1950s © Madrasah Alsagoff Al-Arabiah. The Chinese High School, 1930s © Tan Kah Kee Memorial
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Museum Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 138 “The Last of the Herd” , from The Graphic, 6 October 1877, courtesy of Fowler&fowler/
Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bellary_Zilla,Great_Famine_of_1876%E2%80%9378..jpg. River and town of Singapore from Fort 
Canning Hill by Vincent Brooks, 1865, courtesy of Cornell University Library Digital Collections. 139  Cavenagh Bridge, c. 1890 © Courtesy of National Museum of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Singapore, National Heritage Board. Labourers in Chinatown, early 20th century © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 140 Hand-coloured print of 
Singapore River with Thomson Bridge by Edwin Augustus Porcher, 1851 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 141. Edward Boustead 
© Courtesy of Boustead Singapore Limited. Boustead Institute, early 20th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Watercolour sketch by Charles Dyce, 1847 © National University of Singapore Museum Collection. 142  Tan Kim Seng, c. 1850s © Collection of Asian Civilisations 
Museum. Silver epergne © Courtesy of Tan family. Hajjah Fatimah Mosque © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Sri Mariamman 
Temple, c. 1905. © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 143  Bugis sailor, 1950s © Lee Kip Lin collection, National Library Board,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Singapore. Kampong Bugis, c. 1890s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 144 Alkaff Arcade, c. 1920s © Courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. Sultan Mosque, 1930s © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 145 Chinese street traders, c. 1920s © 
Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Indian bread seller, c. 1910s © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Malay satay seller,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
1900s © Royal Tropical Institute Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Chettiar moneylender, c. 1890 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, 
National Heritage Board. 146 Rickshaw puller and his passenger, c. 1890–c. 1910, courtesy of Rijksmuseum. Chinese migrant workers at a rubber plantation, late 19th 
century © Hsu Chung-mao. Indian coolies repairing a road, c. 1910 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 147  Samsui woman ©
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Building Site / Samsui Women by Liu Kang, 1951 © National University of Singapore Museum 
Collection. 148 Indian convict labourers, 1870s © Mr and Mrs Lee Kip Lee Collection, Singapore. Bricks from an archaeological excavation at the Cathedral of Good 
Shepherd in 2013 © Archaeology Unit, ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute. Convict jail, c. 1870 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 149
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Construction of the frame of a phinisi © MZ Nasution/Shutterstock.com. Scaled replica of a Bugis phinisi on display at the Malay Heritage Centre © Collection of 
Malay Heritage Centre, National Heritage Board. 150 Source 1 © National Archives of Singapore, http://www.nas.gov.sg/archivesonline/oral_history_interviews/
record-details/551c08e1-1160-11e3-83d5-0050568939ad. Source 2 © National Archives of Singapore, http://www.nas.gov.sg/archivesonline/oral_history_interviews/
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
record-details/207fcbef-115e-11e3-83d5-0050568939ad. Singapore Traction Company trolley bus, 1950s © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National 
Heritage Board. 151  Source 3 © William T. Hornaday (1885), Two Years in the Jungle: The Experiences of a Hunter and Naturalist in India, Ceylon, the Malay 
Peninsula and Borneo (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons): reproduced in this publication by CPDD, MOE, published in January 2021, on behalf of and for the
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
educational purposes of Singapore schools and educational institutions funded by the Singapore Government. Hotel de l’Europe, c. 1910s © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 152  Illustration of labourers working on a steamship, published in Illustrated London News, 18 January 1873 © 
Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 153  Labourers at work on a street in Chinatown, c. 1900s © Courtesy of National Archives of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Singapore. 154 Source 4 © National Library Board, http://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/infopedia/articles/SIP_2014-12-16_105929.html. 155 The Chinese Free School, c. 1905 
© Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Gan Eng Seng © Gan Eng Seng School Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Syed Mohamed bin 
Ahmed Alsagoff © Madrasah Alsagoff Al-Arabiah. Alsagoff Arab School © Madrasah Alsagoff Al-Arabiah. Ramakrishna Mission Tamil School, 1928 © Collection of
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Indian Heritage Centre, Gift of Professor A. Mani and Mr Balathandautham Tam. 156 Tao Nan School, 1910 © Tao Nan School. Raffles Girls’ School, c. 1928 © Courtesy 
of National Archives of Singapore. Anglo-Chinese School, c. 1890 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 157  St Joseph’s Institution, c. 1910 © Lim Kheng Chye 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Raffles Institution, c. 1920 © Collection of Singapore Philatelic Museum. Postcard donated by Prof Cheah
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Jin Seng. Convent of the Holy Infant Jesus, c. 1910 © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 158 Thong Chai Medical Institution, 
1890s © Gretchen Liu Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Patients at Thong Chai Medical Institution, c. 1890s © Boden-Kloss Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 159  Tan Tock Seng © Margaret Tan Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Source 5 © National Library
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Board, http://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/infopedia/articles/SIP_70_2004-12-24.html. 1862 map of Singapore Town © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 
Painting showing the Chinese Pauper Hospital on Pearl’s Hill by John Turnbull Thomson, 1848 © John Turnbull Thomson (1821–1884), Chinese and Seamans Hospitals, 
Singapore, 1847, watercolour on paper: 292mm x 451mm, 92/122, given by the Hall-Jones family, 1992, Hocken Collections, Uare Taoka o Hā kena, University of Otago.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
161 Dr Lim Boon Keng © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Eunos Abdullah © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Kampong Melayu, 1935 © Alwee 
Alkaff Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 163  Members of the Straits Chinese British Association, c. 1900 © Courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. Source 6 © Francis Thomas (2013), Memoirs of a Migrant, excerpt reprinted with permission from the author’s estate and Ethos Books, Singapore. 164 A
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Day at Singapore by Gaston Méliès, published in 1913 © RetroGraphik.  Indian labourers, c. 1870 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage 
Board. 165 Trengganu Street, Singapore by Hugo Vilfred Pedersen, c. 1897 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 167  Source A © 
Kwa Chong Guan, Derek Heng, Peter Borschberg and Tan Tai Yong (2019), Seven Hundred Years: A History of Singapore (Singapore: Marshall Cavendish Editions).
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Jawi Peranakkan, 28 March 1881 (Vol. 5, No. 214), courtesy of British Library. 168 Source B, Pilgrims returning from Mecca, c. 1940s © Ministry of Information and the 
Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Source C © William Roff (1967), The Origins of Malay Nationalism (Malaysia: Oxford Fajar Sdn Bhd): 
reproduced in this publication by CPDD, MOE, published in January 2021, on behalf of and for the educational purposes of Singapore schools and educational
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
institutions funded by the Singapore Government. Source D © Jim Baker (2014), Crossroads: A Popular History of Malaysia and Singapore (Singapore: Marshall 
Cavendish International). 170  Brewster Buffaloes at Sembawang Airfield © Imperial War Museum. Japanese Zero fighter, courtesy of PF-(sdasm3)/ Alamy Stock 
Photo. American Brewster buffalo fighter planes over Malaya, 1941–1942 © Library of Congress. Winston Churchill, courtesy of Library and Archives Canada.
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
Lieutenant Adnan bin Saidi © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Gurkha soldiers training in Malaya, 1941 © Imperial War Museum. Malay Regiment, 1941 © 
Imperial War Museum. Smoke from burning oil tanks rising above the streets of Singapore © Imperial War Museum. 171 British commanders on their way to 
surrender to the Japanese at the Ford Factory in Bukit Timah, 15 February 1942 © Imperial War Museum. 172  Painting showing the arrival of a US warship in Japan,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 218) ---
courtesy of The Peggy N. and Roger G. Gerry Collection, Brooklyn Museum. British soldiers with anti-gas helmets © Imperial War Museum. Adolf Hitler © Elzbieta
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
Sekowska/Shutterstock.com. Naval base at Sembawang under construction © National Archives, United Kingdom. 173  German soldiers entering Poland at the start 
of World War II, 1939 © Everett Collection/Shutterstock.com. Battleship USS Arizona burning after the attack on Pearl Harbor, 7 December 1941 © Everett 
Collection/Shutterstock.com. The naval base, 1941, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. British commanders on their way to surrender to the Japanese at the Ford
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
Factory in Bukit Timah, 15 February 1942 © Imperial War Museum. 181 Japanese soldiers at Kallang Airport, 1942 © David Ng Collection, courtesy of National Archives 
of Singapore. Coastal defence gun © Imperial War Museum. Naval base in Sembawang, 1941, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 182  The entrance of the Fort 
Canning bunker © The Battlebox, managed by Singapore History Consultants Pte Ltd. Wax figurines at the Fort Canning command centre discussing Singapore’s
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
surrender © The Battlebox, managed by Singapore History Consultants Pte Ltd. 183 Australian soldiers training in the Malayan jungle, 1941, courtesy of Australian 
War Memorial. Straits Settlements Volunteer Force training in Malaya, 1941 © Imperial War Museum. 184 Johore Causeway © Aerial photographs by the British Royal 
Air Force between 1940 to 1970s, from a collection held by the National Archives of Singapore. Crown copyright. American Brewster buffalo fighter planes over
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
Malaya, 1941–1942 © Library of Congress. Pilots running to the planes at Sembawang Airfield, c. 1941, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 186 Source 1 © National 
Archives of Singapore Oral History Centre. Source 2 © Vlieland Papers, King’s College London, Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives: reproduced in this 
publication by CPDD, MOE, published in January 2021, on behalf of and for the educational purposes of Singapore schools and educational institutions funded by
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
the Singapore Government. 187  Source 3 © Richard Holmes and Anthony Kemp (1982), The Bitter End: The Fall of Singapore 1941–42 (United Kingdom: Antony Bird 
Publications). 188 Japanese Zero fighter, courtesy of PF-(sdasm3)/ Alamy Stock Photo. British Buffalo fighters © Imperial War Museum. Scottish soldiers training in 
Singapore © Imperial War Museum. Gurkha soldiers training in Malaya, 1941 © Imperial War Museum. 189 Soldiers from the Australian 8th Division arriving in
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
Singapore, 1941, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 189 Soldiers from the Australian 8th Division arriving in Singapore, 1941, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 
190 One of Singapore’s 15-inch coastal defence guns © Imperial War Museum. HMS Prince of Wales © Imperial War Museum. General Arthur Percival © Imperial 
War Museum. 191 HMS Repulse (front) leading other Royal Navy ships, late 1920s, courtesy of US Naval History and Heritage Command. Source 4 © Thio Chan Bee
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
(1977), Extraordinary Adventures of an Ordinary Man (United Kingdom: Grosvenor Books). 193  HMS Prince of Wales and HMS Repulse after being hit by Japanese 
torpedoes, 10 December 1941 © Imperial War Museum. HMS Prince of Wales sinking, 10 December 1941, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. The crew of HMS 
Prince of Wales abandoning ship, 10 December 1941 © Imperial War Museum. 194 Japanese soldiers in the Malayan jungle, c. 1942, courtesy of Australian War
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
Memorial. Japanese soldiers crossing a river in Malaya using an improvised bridge, 1941–1942 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Source 5 © Masanobu 
Tsuji (2007), Japan’s Greatest Victory, Britain’s Worst Defeat: The Capture of Singapore, 1942 (H. V. Howe and Margaret E. Lake, Trans.) (United Kingdom: Spellmount). 
Colonel Masanobu Tsuji, courtesy of Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tuji_Masanobu.jpg. 195 Japanese tanks in the Malayan jungle,
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
1942 © Hsu Chung-mao. General Tomoyuki Yamashita, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 196 Source 6 © F. Spencer Chapman (1963), The Jungle Is Neutral (New 
York: W. W. Norton). Japanese soldiers in Malaya © Hsu Chung-mao. 197  Japanese soldiers landing in Kota Bahru, Malaya, 8 December 1941 © Courtesy of the 
National Archives of Malaysia: 1999/000269W. 1940s Pacific War Japanese Army Art Postcard Battle of Trolak & Slim River © Japan War Art. 198 Japanese soldiers
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
at Bukit Timah Hill, 10 February 1942, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 199 Lieutenant Adnan bin Saidi © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Men from 
the Malay Regiment at bayonet practice, 1941 © Imperial War Museum. Wax figurines at the Fort Canning command centre discussing Singapore’s surrender © The 
Battlebox, managed by Singapore History Consultants Pte Ltd. 200 Surrender negotiations at the Ford Motor Factory, 15 February 1942 © Imperial War Museum. 201
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
Winston Churchill, courtesy of Library and Archives Canada. Japanese troops celebrating the capture of Singapore © Hsu Chung-mao. 203  Source A © C. M. Turnbull 
(2009), A History of Modern Singapore, 1819–2005 (Singapore: NUS Press). General Percival with war reporters, 1942 © Imperial War Museum. 204 Source B © Richard 
Holmes and Anthony Kemp (1982), The Bitter End: The Fall of Singapore 1941–42 (United Kingdom: Antony Bird Publications). Source C © Arthur E. Percival (1949),
--- Chunk from Sec1 (Page 219) ---
The War in Malaya (United Kingdom: Eyre & Spottiswoode): reproduced in this publication by CPDD, MOE, published in January 2021, on behalf of and for the 
educational purposes of Singapore schools and educational institutions funded by the Singapore Government.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 0) ---
SECONDARY TWO
SINGAPORE
A Journey Through Time, 
1299–1970s
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 1) ---
2022 Curriculum Planning & Development Division
Ministry of Education, Singapore
51 Grange Road
Singapore 249564
Published by
Star Publishing Pte Ltd
115A Commonwealth Drive, #05-12  
Singapore 149596  
Tel: (65) 6479 6800
Website: www.starpub.com.sg  
Email: contactus@starpub.com.sg
First published 2022
Reprinted 2023
Reprinted 2024
Reprinted 2025
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 1) ---
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of 
the copyright owner. Any request for permission should be 
addressed to the publisher.
ISBN 978-981-4895-25-5
Printed by KHL Printing Co Pte Ltd, Singapore
Front and back covers Sunset and clouds © Paul Shuang/Shutterstock.com.  
Old Supreme Court and Municipal Building, c. 1960s © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. National Gallery Singapore,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 1) ---
2021 © Star Publishing Pte Ltd.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 2) ---
Preface
You are about to continue the exciting journey through the past!
In Secondary 1, you started the journey with From Temasek to Singapore (1299–Early 1800s) and traced Singapore’s 
connections to India, China, the Southeast Asian region and beyond from as early as 1299. You would have found out 
how Singapore was part of the key trading networks even before the arrival of the British.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 2) ---
Your journey continued with Singapore’s Development as a Port City Under the British (1819–1942). Here, you 
examined how British rule and external developments shaped Singapore in various ways. During this period, many 
different groups of people from the region and beyond also came to live and work in Singapore. You would have 
learnt about their experiences, the challenges they faced and their contributions up to the fall of Singapore in 1942.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 2) ---
This year, you will proceed to study Singapore’s Struggle for Independence (1942–1965). You will explore how key 
developments from the 1940s to the 1960s shifted Singapore from a British colony to an independent country. As 
you learn more about Singapore’s road to independence, you will discover how this was influenced by post-war 
global and regional forces, and individuals during this period.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 2) ---
The journey comes to a rest with Surviving as an Independent Nation-State (1965–Late 1970s). Here, you will find 
out how a sense of belonging, reality and hope was fostered as Singapore navigated the challenges of being a newly 
independent nation-state during this time.
Similar to your journey in Secondary 1, various features in this coursebook will guide you in making sense of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 2) ---
Singapore’s history. You will continue to develop greater awareness and curiosity about the past and its relationship 
to the present. The knowledge and skills you acquire will enable you to be open to multiple perspectives and 
empathise with people from diverse backgrounds. These will stand you in good stead, not just academically, but 
also in your everyday life. 
Singapore’s history does not just end here. Your experiences and stories will one day become part of it as time
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 2) ---
passes. Knowing history puts you in a better position to make decisions that will shape the future.
Continue to have an enriching and exciting journey ahead as you learn more about Singapore’s rich history!
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 3) ---
How to Use This Book 
In each chapter, interwoven in the content are historical concepts, skills and activities that can guide you in 
answering the inquiry question.
Chapter Inquiry
The key question provides 
a focal point for you to 
investigate the chapter topic.
Timeline  
The timeline helps you understand key events and developments 
that took place in Singapore and beyond. You will see the 
sequence of events that will be mentioned in the chapter.
Let’s Review  
This feature helps you
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 3) ---
Let’s Review  
This feature helps you 
consolidate your learning 
by linking it to the 
chapter inquiry.
Chapter at a Glance 
This feature outlines the 
content that you will learn  
from the chapter.
In this chapter, you looked at the security challenges Singapore faced after independence and how it 
overcame them. Complete the graphic organiser below to summarise what you have learnt. An example 
has been done for you. LET’S REVIEW
What Security Challenges Did Singapore Face?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 3) ---
What Security Challenges Did Singapore Face?
Konfrontasi posed a serious 
security challenge to Singapore. 
As many as 42 bombings were 
carried out in Singapore during 
the period of Konfrontasi. Such 
incidents threatened the internal 
security of Singapore and 
people’s daily lives were affected.
How Did Singapore Overcome These Challenges?
Diplomacy
Deterrence
150 SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
 
Beyond Singapore
The British return to 
Singapore and set up
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 3) ---
The British return to 
Singapore and set up 
the British Military 
Administration (BMA).World War II ends.The Cold War between 
the United States and 
the Soviet Union begins.
India gains 
independence 
from Britain.The Malayan Emergency 
is declared.
Indonesia gains  
independence from 
the Netherlands.The Communist Party of  
China emerges victorious  
in the Chinese Civil War.
The BMA comes 
to an end.
Singapore holds its 
first-ever election, as 
six members of the 
Legislative Council
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 3) ---
six members of the 
Legislative Council 
are chosen by voters.The Maria Hertogh 
Riots break out.Singapore 
holds its 
second 
election.In Singapore
 Members of the Legislative 
Council, 1948 Admiral Mountbatten announcing 
the Japanese surrender at City Hall, 
12 September 1945 Car overturned and set on 
fire during the Maria Hertogh 
Riots, December 1950 Japanese General Umezu Yoshijiro 
signing the surrender documents  
on board the USS Missouri,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 3) ---
on board the USS Missouri,  
2 September 1945 British troops arriving in 
Singapore at the start of the 
Malayan Emergency, 1948
1947 1950 1951 1945 1946 1948 1949
40 SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)Timeline
CHAPTER  
8
How Did Singapore Become  
an Independent Nation?
Features to Guide  Features to Guide  
and Consolidate Learningand Consolidate Learning
You will learn:
• What the people in 
Singapore experienced 
during the Japanese 
Occupation 
• What problems the people
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 3) ---
Occupation 
• What problems the people 
faced immediately after the 
Japanese surrenderChapter at a Glance
iv
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
Case Investigation
This feature explores historical 
issues using a range of sources, 
allowing you to engage in a 
short inquiry task related to  
the chapter inquiry.
Sources
Sources are used to illustrate people’s experiences or 
perspectives. The accompanying questions guide you  
in examining these sources more closely.  
Learn a Skill
This feature introduces the 
skills of historical analysis. Using 
examples from the chapter,  
it highlights a particular skill
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
it highlights a particular skill 
and gives you opportunities  
to apply your learning. 
Be a Young Historian
This feature introduces you to key 
historical concepts and explains how 
they are relevant to the study of history.  
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
Up to the 1950s, many women in Singapore did not 
have the chance to go to school or work. They were 
often expected to focus on their traditional roles as 
wives and mothers, while men had the opportunity to
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
receive an education and were the main breadwinner. 
This changed, especially after independence, as more 
educational and job opportunities became available 
to women. 
More and more parents became open to sending their 
daughters to school. By 1974, the number of girls 
enrolled in primary and secondary schools was almost 
equal to that of boys. Female students also made up 
45.1 per cent of students enrolled in local universities 
in 1976, up from 30 per cent in 1966.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
in 1976, up from 30 per cent in 1966.
Women also had more opportunities to work outside 
their homes. More decided to join the workforce, as 
Singapore’s growing economy meant more jobs were 
available, and with better salaries, working hours 
and benefits. As a result, the percentage of women 
participating in the labour force increased significantly 
between 1970 and 1980, as shown in Figure 10.9.
But did these opportunities change the experiences
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
of women in every workplace? Read the following 
sources to find out more.How far did the experiences of women in the workplace in Singapore  
change between 1965 and the end of the 1970s?CASE INVESTIGATION
 One of Singapore’s first female taxi drivers, 197610 20 30 40 50 60 70 80All  
Males
All 
 Females
Chinese 
Males
Malay 
Males
Indian 
MalesChinese 
Females
Malay 
Females
Indian 
Females
Participation in the Labour Force (%)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
Females
Participation in the Labour Force (%)
 Figure 10.9: Graph showing the participation in the labour force in 1970  
and 1980Legend 1980 197067.6%
24.6%
66.8%
27.0%
66.3%
75.4%
16.0%14.3%72.0%
39.3%
71.5%
39.7%
71.9%
75.3%
38.2%38.3%
194 SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CHANGE AND CONTINUITY 
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
In Chapter 3, you learnt how historians use the terms “change” and 
“continuity” to describe or compare developments over time. In
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
your study of Singapore’s history, you will have seen that while many 
things changed, others remained the same. For example, although 
Singapore’s rulers changed several times over the centuries, external 
developments continued to influence Singapore regardless of who 
the rulers were.
Additionally, the pace at which change happens may not be constant. 
It may accelerate or slow down significantly as a result of certain 
events or developments.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
events or developments.
One such event is Singapore gaining independence on 9 August 
1965. While some changes had taken place prior to independence, 
this day marked the start of a period of accelerated change in areas 
such as economic and social development. As you continue to learn 
about the developments in post-independence Singapore, bear the 
following questions in mind:
• In what ways did changes take place?
– How quickly did these changes take place?
– How great were the changes?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
– How great were the changes?
– How did people react to the changes?
• In what ways was there continuity?
• In what ways did change and continuity take place at the same time?Hundreds of MNCs from countries such as the Netherlands, Britain, Japan 
and the United States set up operations in Singapore. The MNCs included 
Shell, Seiko and Hewlett-Packard. Refer to Figure 10.1 on the next page to 
find out what attracted the MNCs to Singapore and what effects they had 
on the economy.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
on the economy.
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew at the opening of a 
factory in Marsiling set up by Seiko to manufacture 
watch components, 1976
 Employees at Hewlett-Packard’s plant manufacturing 
electronic equipment at Depot Road, 1979
 Shell oil refinery on Pulau Bukom, 1970s
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more  
about how the  
pace of change can 
vary over time @  
go.gov.sg/lshc1001.
160 SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
LEARN A SKILL: STUDYING PAINTINGS
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
LEARN A SKILL: STUDYING PAINTINGS
Artwork can serve as historical sources. By studying a piece of art, you can find out more about the time 
and place in which it was produced. It can give you an idea of:
• what things looked like;
• what people did and how they did them; and
• how people saw themselves or were seen by others. 
When studying an artwork, you need to know its context. This means learning about the artist and the period
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
in which the artwork was produced. Knowing the context allows you to better understand the messages 
embedded within the artwork. It also directs you to think about why the artwork was produced.
Look at the painting below. Titled On Strike, it was completed in 1955 by artist Tan Tee Chie. Tan was born 
in China in 1928 and studied at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts in Singapore, from which he graduated
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
in 1951. He is known for his series of works depicting the plight and hardships faced by people in post-war 
Singapore.
In Chapter 4, you learnt how to examine images using the process of See-Think-Wonder:
LEARN ON THE GO
Hone your skills in 
analysing historical 
paintings @  
go.gov.sg/lshc701.
See:  
What do you see?Think:  
What do you  
think is going on?Wonder:  
What does it  
make you wonder?1 2 3Step Step Step
 Tan Tee Chie  
On Strike  
1955  
Oil on canvas, 66 x 86.5 cm
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
On Strike  
1955  
Oil on canvas, 66 x 86.5 cm  
Collection of National Gallery Singapore
64 SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
Features to Develop Skills  Features to Develop Skills  
and Conceptual Understandingand Conceptual Understanding
Our army is to be engaged in the defence of the country and our people against external aggression. This task we are 
unable to do today by ourselves. It is no use pretending that without the British military presence in Singapore today, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
island cannot be easily over-run by any neighbouring country within a radius of 1,000 miles, if any of them cared to do  
so. ... 
British military protection today has made quite a number of our citizens complacent about the need to conduct our own 
defence preparations. These people assume that this protection will be permanent. I regard it as the height of folly* to 
plan our future on this assumption … Nobody, neither we nor the British, can say when this† will be. It may be five, ten,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 4) ---
fifteen years; maybe more, maybe less. Whatever the time may be, it would be useless then to think about building up  
your defence forces. The time to do so is now.
– Adapted from a speech by Dr Goh Keng Swee to Parliament, 23 December 1965
* If something is the height of folly, it is extremely foolish.
† “This” refers to the British withdrawal of their defence forces. SOURCE 2
1. According to Source 2, why did Singapore’s leaders feel it was important to build up our defence forces?
v
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 5) ---
Illustrated Stories 
This feature combines 
illustrations and narration 
to help enhance your 
understanding of people, 
events and developments 
in history. 
Did You Know?
This feature provides you 
with fun facts relevant to 
the chapter content.
Features to Enhance Understanding  Features to Enhance Understanding  
or Encourage Explorationor Encourage Exploration
“Think” Bubbles  
This feature encourages you to 
think more deeply about what 
you have just read on the page.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 5) ---
you have just read on the page.  
Maria was born in Java in 1937 to Dutch Catholic 
parents. When Maria’s father was imprisoned in 
1942 during the Japanese Occupation, Maria’s 
mother, Adeline Hertogh, left her in the care of 
a local family friend, Che Aminah. Maria was 
renamed Nadra binte Ma’arof and raised in the 
Muslim faith. After the war, Maria and her foster 
family moved to Malaya.
While the case was under appeal, some 
newspapers published sensationalised
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 5) ---
newspapers published sensationalised 
stories about Maria’s life in the convent. 
The case was also portrayed as a religious 
issue between Islam and Christianity. Many 
Muslims were upset as they felt that their 
religion was being disrespected. 
Troops were sent to the scenes, but the riots continued for 
three days. In response to the violence, a curfew was imposed. 
By the end of the riots, 18 people had been killed and 173 injured. In 1950, Adeline tried to reclaim her daughter by making
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 5) ---
a case to the court in Singapore. The British judge ruled 
that Maria be returned to her natural parents. Adeline 
placed Maria in a Catholic convent while waiting to 
return to the Netherlands. In response, Che Aminah 
appealed against the judge’s decision.
The judge eventually rejected Che Aminah’s appeal. Feeling 
that the British had sided unfairly with the Dutch, Che Aminah’s 
supporters reacted angrily. They overturned cars on the streets
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 5) ---
and set them on fire. They also attacked any Europeans and 
Eurasians in sight.The MARIA HERTOGH RIOTS The MARIA HERTOGH RIOTS 
54 SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
What does the 1948 election 
tell you about British attitudes 
towards the locals?
Think!
To ensure safe passage of the hijackers 
of the Laju  from Singapore to Kuwait, 
a group of Singapore government 
officials, led by S. R. Nathan, 
accompanied the hijackers on their 
flight. Nathan (leaning forward in the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 5) ---
flight. Nathan (leaning forward in the 
image below) was then Director of the 
Security and Intelligence Division at 
the Ministry of Defence, and would 
later go on to serve as President 
of Singapore. The Singapore team 
comprised Nathan, eight government 
officials and four Singapore Armed 
Forces commandos.DID YOU KNOW?
 The 13 Singaporean officials upon returning to 
Singapore from Kuwait on 9 February 1974
vi
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 6) ---
Glossary  
The glossary explains keywords and vocabulary used. 
Learn on the Go
Scan the QR code or use the 
link to access a relevant lesson 
on the Singapore Student 
Learning Space (SLS) to extend 
your learning. 
Who Was  
This feature gives you 
background information on 
key historical personalities 
introduced in the chapter.
?
1 A nation-state refers to an independent country whose people share similarities, such as a common national identity, history 
and culture.LEARN ON THE GO
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 6) ---
and culture.LEARN ON THE GO
Sharpen your 
propaganda 
interpretation skills @  
go.gov.sg/lshc602 .
Who was  
DAVID MARSHALL?
?
David Marshall (1908–1995) was 
born in Singapore into a Jewish family 
from Baghdad (in present-day Iraq). 
During World War II, he joined local 
volunteer forces to fight against the 
Japanese, but was captured and sent to 
various prison camps overseas.
After his return to Singapore in 1946, 
Marshall enjoyed a successful career 
as a lawyer. He was also actively
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 6) ---
as a lawyer. He was also actively 
involved in Singapore’s political scene. 
Originally a member of the SPP , he 
later resigned and joined the Singapore 
Socialist Party – one of the two parties 
that later came together to form the 
LF. In 1955, Marshall resigned from 
his legal career and won a seat in 
the Legislative Assembly election 
as a representative of the Cairnhill 
constituency. As leader of the LF, 
he also assumed the role of Chief 
Minister. Following the failure of the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 6) ---
Minister. Following the failure of the 
First Merdeka Talks, he resigned on  
7 June 1956. 
Marshall continued to be active in 
politics and founded the Workers’ 
Party in 1957. From 1978, he served 
as Singapore’s Ambassador to various 
countries such as France, Spain, 
Portugal and Switzerland, before 
finally retiring in 1993.
vii
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 7) ---
Ellenborough Market, 1960s, by Lui Hock Seng, a local photographer.  
Ellenborough Market was first built in 1845 and was located by the Singapore River.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 9) ---
Aerial view of the Singapore River and the surrounding Central Business District, 1971, by Kouo Shang-Wei, one of the pioneer photographers of Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 10) ---
38 How Did the People in Singapore Respond 
to British Rule After World War II?CHAPTER 7
84 How Did Singapore Become 
an Independent Nation?CHAPTER 8
124 How Did Singapore Safeguard 
Its Independence After 1965?CHAPTER 9
154 To What Extent Did People’s Lives 
Change After Independence?CHAPTER 10
CONCLUSION
198 What You Have LearntCHAPTER 6
4 What Did the People in Singapore Experience 
During the Japanese Occupation?UNIT 3: OVERVIEW
Singapore’s Struggle for Independence 
(1942–1965)2
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 10) ---
(1942–1965)2
122UNIT 4: OVERVIEW
Surviving as an Independent Nation-State 
(1965–Late 1970s)
CONTENTS
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 11) ---
3In this unit, we will study how the fall of Singapore to Japanese forces in 1942 marked the start 
of a turbulent period in Singapore’s history. The hardships and sufferings during the Japanese 
Occupation changed the people’s attitudes towards British rule. Following the British return, 
unrest grew as people in Singapore began to question British rule and desire control over 
their own destinies. Wider global developments, especially the Cold War, influenced people’s
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 11) ---
sentiments and the decisions and actions of the British. Decolonisation in other parts of Asia 
also spurred the people in Malaya and Singapore to fight for independence from the British.Singapore’s Struggle for Independence (1942–1965)UNIT
 OVERVIEW
1942
1957 Parade at the Padang during the Japanese Occupation
1950
 Scene near the Padang during the Maria Hertogh Riots
1945
 Admiral Louis Mountbatten inspecting the Royal Navy Guard of Honour at the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 11) ---
Padang in front of the Municipal Building (former City Hall, one of the two 
buildings that make up the present-day National Gallery Singapore) where the 
Japanese surrender ceremony was held Lee Kuan Yew delivering a speech at City Hall in front of the Padang during a 
welcome ceremony for the all-party delegation’s return from London following 
the end of the Merdeka Talks
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 12) ---
We will also explore how, on some occasions, the unrest flared into open confrontation and conflict with the 
authorities. Strikes, demonstrations and riots were a common sight during the late 1940s and early 1950s. The 
British realised that it was important to give the people more say in how they were ruled. Gradual constitutional 
shifts took place, and elections were held to allow people the chance to choose their leaders.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 12) ---
Eventually, Singapore attained full self-government in 1959. However, for Singapore’s leaders at that time, this was 
not the final step. To finally free Singapore from British rule, they pursued merger with the newly independent 
Malaya. While the merger eventually became reality in the form of Malaysia, it did not last. In 1965, Singapore left 
Malaysia and became an independent country of its own.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 12) ---
Coincidentally, many of these significant events took place at or near the Padang. Which events do you have 
some knowledge of? Which events are you interested in learning more about?
1959
 Yusof bin Ishak (the newly installed Yang di-Pertuan Negara) and Cabinet and 
Legislative Assembly members at the City Hall steps overlooking the Padang 
during the launch of National Loyalty Week on 3 December 1959. This was a 
significant moment, with “Majulah Singapura” being sung for the first time as
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 12) ---
Singapore’s State Anthem.
1963
1965
 Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall  Ceremonial parade at the Padang during the opening of the first Singapore 
Parliament
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 14) ---
Street in Singapore during the Japanese Occupation, 1943
5
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
Following the British surrender, the Japanese Occupation of Singapore 
began on 15 February 1942 and lasted until 12 September 1945. During that 
time, Singapore was renamed “Syonan-to” (Japanese for “Light of the South 
Island”). In order to standardise time across the territories in the Japanese
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 14) ---
Empire, clocks were moved forward one and a half hours to follow Tokyo 
time. 
It was a period of great hardship for the majority of the population. Almost 
every aspect of life, such as food, education and labour, was heavily 
controlled and regulated by the Japanese. The people in Singapore lived in 
constant fear and hopelessness, and lacked even basic necessities. In this 
chapter, you will learn how the people lived through these tumultuous 
years.CHAPTER  
6
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 14) ---
years.CHAPTER  
6
What Did the People in Singapore 
Experience During the Japanese 
Occupation?
You will learn:
• What the people in 
Singapore experienced 
during the Japanese 
Occupation 
• What problems the people 
faced immediately after the 
Japanese surrenderChapter at a Glance
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 15) ---
Beyond Singapore
Singapore is renamed 
“Syonan-to” following the 
British surrender to the 
Japanese. Shortly after, 
Operation Sook Ching begins.2 July  
Subhas Chandra Bose 
arrives in Singapore to 
lead the Indian National 
Army (INA) movement.September  
The first batch of 
200 Chinese settlers 
leave Singapore for 
Endau, Malaya.7 December  
Japan attacks Pearl Harbor; 
start of World War II in the 
Asia Pacific and the United 
States’ involvement in the war.3–6 June
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 15) ---
States’ involvement in the war.3–6 June  
Japan suffers heavy naval and air 
losses in the Battle of Midway against 
the United States. This severely 
affects its military capabilities 
throughout the remainder of the war.
December 
The first batch of 
Eurasian and Chinese 
Roman Catholic 
settlers leave Singapore 
for Bahau, Malaya.In Singapore Sook Ching screening station at 
North Bridge Road, 1942 Battleship USS Arizona burning 
after the attack on Pearl Harbor, 
7 December 1941
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 15) ---
7 December 1941
 Settlers ploughing the 
ground in Bahau, c. 1944
1941 1942 1943
6
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)Timeline
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 16) ---
The Malayan People’s  
Anti-Japanese Army (MPAJA) 
joins other resistance groups 
such as Force 136.7 May   
Germany formally 
surrenders to the 
Allies, who can now 
focus more resources 
on defeating Japan.6 and 9 August   
The Allies drop atomic 
bombs first on Hiroshima, 
then on Nagasaki.15 August  
Emperor Hirohito 
announces Japan’s 
surrender to the 
Allies.2 September  
Japan formally 
surrenders to the Allies 
on the USS Missouri.
5 September  
The British return to Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 16) ---
5 September  
The British return to Singapore 
and set up the British Military 
Administration (BMA).31 March  
The BMA hands over 
the administration of 
Singapore to the British 
civilian government.
12 September  
The Japanese military signs a formal surrender 
document with Admiral Louis Mountbatten, 
the Supreme Allied Commander of the South 
East Asia Command. Atomic cloud rising over 
Nagasaki, 9 August 1945
 Admiral Mountbatten announcing 
the Japanese surrender at City Hall,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 16) ---
the Japanese surrender at City Hall, 
12 September 1945
 Japanese General Umezu 
Yoshijiro signing the 
surrender documents on 
board the USS Missouri,  
2 September 1945
1946
 1944 1945
7
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 17) ---
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: DIVERSITY
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
As you learnt in Chapter 4, when historians study the past, they look 
at diverse and sometimes opposing perspectives. They recognise that 
people might have had different experiences even though they lived in 
the same place during the same time. By studying diverse perspectives, 
historians can form a more complete picture of the past, which helps 
them understand historical events better.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 17) ---
them understand historical events better.
In this chapter, you will look at how people’s experiences during the 
Japanese Occupation differed depending on their circumstances. 
When taking the perspective of historical actors, you might want to 
think about how the historical actors thought and felt. You can make 
valid inferences about their beliefs, values and motivations based on 
evidence that you come across.
How Did the Japanese Establish 
Control in Singapore?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 17) ---
Control in Singapore?
In the immediate aftermath of the British surrender, Singapore was in  
a state of disorder. Japanese bombings had resulted in casualties and 
damage to buildings. Looting was also rampant as people took advantage 
of the chaos to strip houses of everything valuable.
 Buildings damaged by Japanese bombings, 
February 1942
The Japanese acted quickly to restore order. They employed a range of 
methods to make the people in Singapore submit to Japanese authority.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 17) ---
These included using force and winning the loyalty of the locals (see Figure 
6.1 on the next page).LEARN ON THE GO
Explore the 
diversity of people’s 
experiences during 
the Japanese 
Occupation @  
go.gov.sg/lshc601.
8
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 18) ---
Figure 6.1: How the Japanese controlled Singapore
Winning Loyalty
Using Propaganda
Providing Benefits 
to the Locals
Imposing  
Japanese Culture
Teaching the 
Japanese Language
Cultivating the 
Japanese Spirit
Using Force
Coercing the 
Chinese Business 
Community
Carrying Out 
Operation  
Sook Ching
Meting Out Harsh 
Punishments
Imprisoning Allied 
Soldiers
Methods the Japanese  
Used to Control Singapore
9
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 19) ---
How do you think the locals 
viewed the British when they 
were captured as POWs?Think!
 British POWs marching on the road to Changi 
Prison, 1942 Sketch by Singaporean artist Liu Kang showing a 
Japanese soldier pulling out the nails of a detainee 
to get a confession
Using Force
Meting Out Harsh Punishments
Throughout the Japanese Occupation, harsh punishments were imposed 
on criminals and other people seen by the Japanese as their enemies.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 19) ---
For example, to put an end to the looting that happened just after the 
British surrender, the Japanese executed those who were caught. The 
heads were displayed publicly in places such as the open area outside the 
Cathay Building, and on bridges across the Singapore River. Such harsh 
punishments created fear and served as severe warnings to the people 
about the potential consequences of going against the Japanese. 
One group that many people feared above all was the Kempeitai,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 19) ---
the Japanese military police. The Kempeitai arrested those who were 
suspected of being anti-Japanese. Food or cash rewards were offered to 
encourage people to inform the authorities of anyone they suspected of 
being involved in anti-Japanese activities. As a result, nobody knew whom 
to trust and people became suspicious of one another. Anti-Japanese 
suspects would be beaten or tortured until they revealed information that
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 19) ---
the Japanese wanted. In some cases, those suspected of anti-Japanese 
activities were imprisoned or executed. Over time, many people learnt to 
go about their business quietly and not appear disobedient in case they 
drew the unwanted attention of the Japanese authorities.
Imprisoning Allied Soldiers
When the Japanese took control of the island, they had plans to deal with 
the Allied1 troops and the people in Singapore. One of the first things
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 19) ---
that the Japanese did was to imprison the British, Australians and Allied 
Europeans in Singapore, including women and children. The Allied prisoners 
of war (POWs) were forced to march in public from Bukit Timah Road to 
Changi Prison and the barracks nearby, where they would be imprisoned. 
Along the way, many civilians passed the POWs food and money, despite 
the risk of being punished by the Japanese.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 19) ---
the risk of being punished by the Japanese. 
1 The Allies refers to the group of countries that fought against Germany and Japan during World War II. These included 
Australia, Britain, China, New Zealand, the Soviet Union and the United States.
10
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 20) ---
2 A purge is a sudden or violent removal of a group of people.
3 A boycott is the act of refusing to purchase items from and/or provide other forms of support to a country or organisation  
to protest against the actions of that country or organisation.Carrying Out Operation Sook Ching
Soon after taking control of Singapore, the Japanese forces carried out 
Operation Sook Ching (“Cleansing”) which aimed to identify and eliminate
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 20) ---
anti-Japanese elements among the local population. It was a brutal purge2 
of members of the Chinese community who were suspected of being anti-
Japanese. The Kempeitai was placed in charge of this fearsome operation.
The Chinese population was targeted as they were viewed by the Japanese 
as a potential source of opposition and threat to their rule. This was because 
when the Japanese invaded China in 1937, they faced strong resistance from
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 20) ---
the Chinese, including Chinese communities living outside China. For 
instance, the Chinese community in Singapore called for a boycott3 of 
Japanese goods and contributed funds to China’s efforts against Japan. 
Some even returned to China to join in the fight against the Japanese.
The Japanese posted notices requiring all Chinese men aged 18 to 50 to 
assemble at mass screening centres to be examined by the Japanese. These
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 20) ---
screening centres were located all over the island, such as the former Young 
Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) building at Stamford Road, which was 
used as the headquarters of the Kempeitai East District Branch.
Japanese records estimate that 6,000 people were killed during the 
operation. However, other estimates show the figure to be between 
25,000 and 50,000.
Read the illustrated story on the next page to find out how the Japanese 
forces carried out Operation Sook Ching.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 20) ---
forces carried out Operation Sook Ching.
 YMCA building at Stamford Road, 1930s
 Sook Ching screening station at North Bridge Road, 1942
11
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 21) ---
One by one, the Chinese men went before 
a Japanese officer who sat at a table in a 
heavily guarded barbed wire enclosure. Informants would identify people who were 
suspected of being anti-Japanese and pass on the 
information to the Kempeitai.
The informants were looking in particular for secret 
society members with tattoos, former Chinese civil 
servants and journalists. These people were thought 
to have stronger links with China and were seen to 
be resistant to the Japanese.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 21) ---
be resistant to the Japanese.
Upon inspection, those who were not identified 
as anti-Japanese were allowed to go home. 
They would receive a stamp (shown above) on a 
piece of paper, clothing, face, arm or shoulder, 
which meant they had been examined. This stamp 
became an important pass which allowed them to 
avoid further questioning by the Japanese.
However, those Chinese men who did not 
pass the screening would be stamped with a 
triangular mark, tied up and kept under guard.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 21) ---
triangular mark, tied up and kept under guard. 
The men were then transported to beaches in Punggol 
and Changi where they were executed. Thousands of 
Chinese men were killed in this massacre.OPERATION SOOK CHINGOPERATION SOOK CHING
Who to look out for
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
12
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 22) ---
Persecution by Singaporean artist Koeh Sia Yong, 1963, showing Chinese men being taken to the execution 
ground during Operation Sook Ching
 Civilian War Memorial, late 1960s.  
The memorial, situated along Beach Road 
(near present-day Suntec City), was built to 
commemorate the civilian victims killed during
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 22) ---
commemorate the civilian victims killed during  
the Japanese Occupation. Wartime relics belonging to victims of Operation Sook Ching: a wallet, a set of keychain and whistle, a pair of earrings and a stethoscope. These personal belongings 
were found together with human remains and items from other victims during an excavation conducted in 1963.
13
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 23) ---
4 Propaganda is information or ideas spread by a group or government to influence people’s opinions, especially by not giving all 
the facts or by emphasising only one point of view. Cathay Building (site of present-day The Cathay) 
on Handy Road, 1945, the Japanese propaganda 
office during the Japanese Occupation Propaganda poster with the caption “Vim, vigour, 
vitality and last, but not least, perfect harmony!”. 
The poster shows a group of seven women in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 23) ---
The poster shows a group of seven women in 
Japanese, Chinese, Malay and Indian attire playing 
hanetsuki (a traditional Japanese game played 
with racquets and a shuttlecock) and walking hand 
in hand, c. 1943Coercing the Chinese Business Community
The Japanese also targeted the Chinese businessmen in Singapore because 
of their generous contributions to the China Relief Fund, which supported 
China’s resistance against Japan. The Overseas Chinese Association
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 23) ---
(OCA) was created to act as a channel of communication between the 
Chinese community and the Japanese government. Dr Lim Boon Keng 
was appointed to head the OCA. The Japanese demanded that the OCA 
gift 50 million Straits dollars to the Japanese administration. This was to 
punish the Chinese community in Malaya and Singapore for supporting 
anti-Japanese war activities in China as well as British war efforts in Malaya 
and Singapore. 
Winning Loyalty 
Using Propaganda
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 23) ---
and Singapore. 
Winning Loyalty 
Using Propaganda
In addition to using force to assert their authority, the Japanese also 
sought to win over the locals in order to establish control over Singapore. 
One way they did so was to use propaganda4 to influence the minds of 
the people in Singapore and gain their loyalty. The Japanese portrayed 
themselves as liberators who had come to free Asians from colonial rule. 
They tried to convince the locals to accept their vision of the Greater
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 23) ---
East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere in which Japan would free Asian nations 
from the control of Western colonial powers. This vision also pressed for 
a united Asia that would benefit from sharing resources collectively. These 
messages were spread through various channels, such as posters and radio 
broadcasts.One leader of the anti-Japanese 
movement in Malaya and Singapore 
was Tan Kah Kee. As Chairman of 
the China Relief Fund, set up in 1937, 
he organised local fundraising efforts
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 23) ---
he organised local fundraising efforts 
to support China in the war against 
Japan. When the Japanese cut supply 
routes to China, he arranged for lorry 
drivers and mechanics from Singapore 
to transport supplies to China through 
Burma (present-day 
Myanmar). He also 
encouraged the  
boycott of Japanese 
goods in Malaya  
and Singapore.DID YOU KNOW?
 Tan Kah Kee
14
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 24) ---
Providing Benefits to the Locals
In their attempt to win local support, the Japanese provided certain 
benefits, such as schooling and accommodation, at no cost. For example, 
school textbooks were provided free of charge to 20,000 students in 1944. 
The Japanese also appealed to some ethnic groups by giving them 
favourable treatment. The Malay nationalist organisation Kesatuan Melayu 
Muda (Union of Malay Youth or KMM) responded positively to Japanese
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 24) ---
propaganda that promised better lives for Malays under an Asian power. 
This resulted in Malays being treated less harshly by the Japanese. For 
instance, the Japanese distributed rice, sugar and salt to the less fortunate 
for Hari Raya Puasa. Malays and Indians were also charged lower fees than
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 24) ---
the Chinese to cross the Causeway. Subhas Chandra Bose inspecting the guard of honour presented by women soldiers in the INA at Waterloo Street, 1943The Japanese also tried to use propaganda to get the Indian community 
to look upon Japanese rule favourably. Aware that some Indian immigrants 
were influenced by the rise of anti-British sentiments, the Japanese 
promised to help free India from the British. The Indian National Army
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 24) ---
(INA) was thus formed with Japanese support to recruit Indians to fight 
against the British in India. It was led by Subhas Chandra Bose, a prominent 
Indian politician who campaigned for India’s independence from British 
rule. His charismatic presence attracted many new recruits. However, not 
all Indians were allied with the Japanese; many of those who remained 
loyal to the British were imprisoned.
15
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 25) ---
LEARN A SKILL: INTERPRETING PROPAGANDA IMAGES
Propaganda images such as posters, photographs, postcards and illustrations provide details that you can 
use to understand the past. As the Japanese often used propaganda images to spread their messages to the 
people in Singapore, historians can study the posters and postcards created during the Syonan period to 
better understand Japanese aims then. So, what do propaganda images reveal about Japanese aims?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 25) ---
One way to examine propaganda images is to use the suggested layers of inference framework below. An 
example is provided below to guide you in your analysis.
  
What was the intention of the artist? 3
Which group of people do you think the poster was designed for?
As the poster was distributed in Singapore, it was intended for the people who lived in Singapore under Japanese rule.
What emotion(s) was the artist trying to make the audience feel?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 25) ---
By showing that people of different ethnic groups were happy with Japanese rule, the artist was trying to make the locals 
feel optimistic and hopeful about Japanese rule in Singapore.
What was the artist trying to get the audience to do? 
The artist was trying to get the locals to accept and embrace Japanese rule in Singapore. What was the poster trying to convey about life in Singapore during the Japanese Occupation? 2
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 25) ---
The poster was trying to convey that the various ethnic groups in Singapore were united and living in harmony. What details do you see in the poster? 1
The poster shows the Japanese and local people of different ethnic groups wearing their traditional attires. 
They are standing side by side and seem to be happy. 
 Poster distributed in 
Singapore during the 
Japanese Occupation 
celebrating the tencho  
setsu (birthday of the 
Meiji Emperor), c. 1943
16
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 25) ---
Meiji Emperor), c. 1943
16
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 26) ---
Now use the same set of questions to analyse the postcard below.
  
What was the intention of the artist? 3
Which group of people do you think the postcard was designed for?
What emotion(s) was the artist trying to make the audience feel?
What was the artist trying to get the audience to do?What was the postcard trying to convey about life 
in Singapore during the Japanese Occupation?2What details do you see in the postcard? 1 Japanese postcard 
for occupied nations, 
c. 1943. Those who
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 26) ---
for occupied nations, 
c. 1943. Those who 
received the postcard 
were meant to draw in 
the facial expression 
of the Japanese 
soldier.
LEARN ON THE GO
Sharpen your 
propaganda 
interpretation skills @  
go.gov.sg/lshc602 .
17
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 27) ---
Imposing Japanese Culture
The Japanese sought to win loyalty by immersing the locals in the traditions 
of Japan. Japanese culture was held up as a model for all to follow and was 
imposed in a few ways, such as making students and many adults learn the 
Japanese language and culture. In doing so, the Japanese authorities hoped 
to imbue the Singapore population with the Japanese spirit.
Teaching the Japanese Language
One key way the Japanese promoted their culture was through the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 27) ---
teaching of the Japanese language (Nippon-go). Students were taught 
to speak and write in Japanese in place of English. These lessons were 
conducted daily over the schools’ broadcasting services. To help students 
learn the Japanese language, Japanese education authorities published a 
series of Nippon-go books for beginners. The books were full of praise for 
the beauty and greatness of Japan.
Apart from students, many adults also had to learn Nippon-go. For
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 27) ---
instance, teachers were required to attend language classes several times 
a week. Language lessons also became a regular feature in the newspapers. 
Competitions, awards, extra rations, salary increments and promotions 
were used to motivate people to learn the Japanese language.
 Nippon-go lessons published in the newspaper 
Syonan Shimbun, 2 September 1943 Japanese language learning during the Japanese Occupation was promoted in various ways. One way was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 27) ---
through the use of picture charts, published in local newspapers, that taught basic Japanese terms and how 
to count. This picture chart was likely published between 1943 and 1944. Japanese language students with their Japanese 
teacher during the Japanese Occupation, 1942
18
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 28) ---
Cultivating the Japanese Spirit
The introduction of the Japanese language went hand in hand with the 
promotion of Nippon seishin (Japanese spirit) to foster a sense of loyalty 
and identity. During morning assembly in schools, students had to sing 
“Kimigayo” , the Japanese national anthem, and bow before the picture of 
the Japanese Emperor before the day began. They were also taught to sing 
Japanese folk songs. 
Additionally, daily mass exercises were introduced to the locals. These mass
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 28) ---
exercises were broadcast with instructions and rhythmic music on public 
radio. The Japanese emphasised physical education to instil discipline and 
promote fitness among the masses. Selected youths also received training 
in traditional Japanese martial arts such as kendo and judo to propagate the 
Japanese spirit in schools.
 The authorities promoted Japanese culture among 
the local people by making Japanese customs and 
culture a part of their daily routine. An example
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 28) ---
of this was the Sakura Shimbun, a newsletter 
published by the Gunseikanbu (Central Military 
Administration) for schoolchildren.
 Mass exercise in a school during the Japanese Occupation, c. 1940s
Under Japanese rule, people in Singapore had to follow the Japanese calendar and 
celebrate festivals and anniversaries corresponding to those in Japan. These included 
the following:
• 11 February – National Foundation Day (the day the first Japanese Emperor
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 28) ---
ascended the throne), which also marked the day the Japanese conquered Bukit 
Timah
• 15 February – Day marking the surrender of the British (holiday celebrated only in 
Syonan-to)
• 10 March – Army Day marking Japan’s victory over the Russian army in 1905
• 27 May – Navy Day marking Japan’s victory over the Russian naval fleet in 1905
• 8 December – Day marking the start of Japan’s war with Britain and the United 
StatesDID YOU KNOW?
19
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 28) ---
StatesDID YOU KNOW?
19
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 29) ---
What Was Daily Life Like Under 
the Japanese? 
Japanese rule in Singapore brought great hardship, and people lived in 
fear daily. Many people struggled for survival due to the shortage of 
food, the spread of diseases and the relocation to rural areas outside 
Singapore. However, amid times of hardship and suffering, there were 
some opportunities for leisure and entertainment.
Survival
Dealing with Shortages
The war had disrupted trade, which limited the import of goods into
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 29) ---
Singapore from overseas. Furthermore, most of the available resources 
were channelled to Japan’s war efforts rather than to the people. As a 
result, there was a shortage of food and essential items. 
After the first few weeks of the Japanese Occupation, essential food items 
such as rice, salt and sugar were strictly rationed. The locals were limited 
to a fixed quantity of essential items that they could obtain using ration 
coupons.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 29) ---
coupons.
The shortage of items drove prices up as shops did not have enough 
goods to cater to the needs of the people. The prices of essential goods 
increased rapidly over time, causing drastic inflation.5 
As a result, the black market6 flourished. People had to pay extremely 
high prices for basic necessities. The Japanese government responded by 
printing more money (commonly known as “banana notes” because of the 
images of banana trees printed on 10-dollar notes), resulting in massive
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 29) ---
drops in the value of the banana notes. By the end of the Japanese 
Occupation, these notes had essentially become worthless.
 Rice purchasing card used to indicate the amount 
of rice each household could purchase in a week, 
c. 1942
  Banana notes used during the Japanese Occupation
5 Inflation refers to the rise in prices of most goods and services of daily or common use. This reduces the value of money as 
each dollar can now purchase fewer goods and services.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 29) ---
6 A black market refers to a situation in which goods are bought and sold illegally at unreasonably high prices.
20
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 30) ---
Read Sources 1 and 2 to find out more about the problems people faced 
during the Japanese Occupation and some of the ways they coped with 
these problems.
As an example, the price of [one] egg [was] 3 cents. [W]hen the Japanese came, [it] started to rise to $3, then $10 ... And 
if your salary was, say, $100, if you have to pay $10 for an egg, you can imagine how you are going to survive. So we used
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 30) ---
to sell our things. And the highest value was given for gold ornaments. … So what my mother used to do, I remember, we 
survived because my mother sold her jewellery … One earring set sold, with that money, she used to buy sugar, rice and 
keep in the [home], you know, in containers, old trunks and other things …
– Adapted from a 1983 oral interview with Ronendra Karmakar on his family’s experience during the Japanese OccupationSOURCE 1
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 30) ---
As the war dragged on, the shortage of rice became increasingly [severe]. Wheat flour was no longer obtainable. The 
entire supply had been [taken] by the Japanese authorities for their own use … the loaves on sale to the public were now 
hard as bricks ... Beef, pork and poultry were so expensive that dogs and cats began to disappear from the streets! Once 
I saw rats in wire traps being sold at foodstalls in Waterloo Street.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 30) ---
The once despised tapioca root replaced rice as the staple food … [we] would plant tapioca during our spare time, and 
after several months we had a sufficient supply for the family to supplement our meagre rice ration. Occasionally we 
longed for meat, but it was impossible on a [teacher]’s salary to buy beef or pork. 
– Adapted from an account by Thio Chan Bee, a teacher in Singapore during the Japanese Occupation, published in 1977SOURCE 2
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 30) ---
1. According to Sources 1 and 2, what were the problems faced by the people in Singapore during the Japanese 
Occupation?
2. How did the people in Singapore cope with these problems?Towards the end of the Japanese Occupation, high inflation occurred due to more 
money being printed and an increased demand for a limited supply of essential items. 
It was common for people to bring bags of money to go shopping. Some also used 
goods to trade for what they wanted. DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 30) ---
Item Pre-1942 Price 1945 Price
Egg $0.03 $15
Fish $0.20 $320
Sugar $0.04 $60
 Table showing the prices of various goods before and during the Japanese OccupationLEARN ON THE GO
Learn more  
about how people 
coped with the 
economic situation  
in Singapore during 
the Japanese 
Occupation @  
go.gov.sg/lshc603.
21
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 31) ---
POW in Changi Prison, 1945Disease and Death
Healthcare and sanitation, which had hardly been a priority of the colonial 
authorities before the outbreak of war, worsened during the Japanese 
Occupation. Furthermore, the local population was weakened by food 
shortages. The death rate climbed as a result. Between 1942 and 1945, 
130,000 deaths were officially recorded. This was more than double the 
number between 1937 and 1940. The primary causes of death were beriberi
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 31) ---
(a disease caused by a lack of vitamin B1), pneumonia (lung infection) and 
dysentery (intestinal inflammation).
One group that endured particularly harsh living conditions was the 
POWs and civilian prisoners. They faced continual shortages of food and 
medicine, and acute overcrowding. For instance, while Changi Prison was 
designed for 600 prisoners, it held up to 5,000. Such living conditions led 
to poor hygiene and the spread of diseases.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 31) ---
to poor hygiene and the spread of diseases.
In addition, the Japanese used the POWs as forced labour. They were made 
to clear war damage, bury the dead and build Japanese memorial shrines. 
From May 1942, many POWs were sent to work on the Siam-Burma Railway, 
also known as the “Death Railway” , where about 16,000 died under horrific 
working conditions. The railway connected Burma (present-day Myanmar) 
and Siam (present-day Thailand).
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 31) ---
and Siam (present-day Thailand).
 Severely malnourished Australian soldiers in a hospital ward after being released from Changi Prison, 
September 1945
 Part of the Siam-Burma Railway, c. 1943
22
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 32) ---
Bridge Over the River Kwai by Allied POW Leo Rawlings, 1943, showing four POWs, waist-deep 
in water, carrying a large log across the River Kwai in Siam (present-day Thailand) during the 
construction of the Siam-Burma RailwayThe living and working conditions on 
the “Death Railway” were very harsh. 
The POWs were given simple tools to 
fell huge trees and cut through rocks. 
Diseases were widespread, and the 
men were not given sufficient food and 
medical treatment. Besides the POWs, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 32) ---
medical treatment. Besides the POWs, the 
Japanese also drafted local people to work 
on the railway. Many suffered and died.DID YOU KNOW?
 Allied POWs laying track in Ronsi, Burma, c. 1943 Drawing by Allied POW Murray Griffin of the interior of Changi Prison showing how every available space was used, 1945
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 33) ---
Relocations
During the Japanese Occupation, people were encouraged to strive for 
self-sufficiency by growing their own food, which included vegetables, 
tapioca and sweet potatoes. When this failed to ease the food shortage, 
the Japanese resorted to relocating people from Singapore to increase 
agricultural output. A Japanese government official, Mamoru Shinozaki, 
was tasked to oversee the resettlement projects to rural areas outside 
Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 33) ---
Singapore.
The Chinese were encouraged to move to the Endau settlement in Johor 
(see Map 6.1). The soil there was rich and the water supply ample, making 
it suitable for agriculture. The settlement was proclaimed a great success 
as it was self-sufficient. In addition, the settlement had street lights, a 
hospital, a small chapel, a bank and several coffee shops. However, attacks 
by bandits and anti-Japanese guerrillas7 later disrupted the peace in this 
settlement.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 33) ---
settlement. 
A few months after setting up Endau, the Japanese created the Bahau 
settlement (see Map 6.1) in Negeri Sembilan, another state in Malaya, for 
Eurasians and Chinese Roman Catholics. However, the land was too hilly 
and the soil too poor to support agriculture. Some people even resorted to 
eating rats and maggots, and many of them perished. 
Read Source 3 to learn more about life in Bahau during the Japanese 
Occupation.
 Mamoru Shinozaki
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 33) ---
Occupation.
 Mamoru Shinozaki
For the hardworking person, life in Bahau was manageable. But the constant malaria outbreaks made it unpleasant. Still, 
work provided food that sustained the individual and increased his chance of survival. At least one family succeeded in 
growing rice. … Many farmers in the colony produced enough tapioca to barter it for rice, but the supply was not enough.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 33) ---
– Adapted from an account by Joseph Conceicao, published in 2004. Conceicao lived in Bahau in his 20s. SOURCE 3
1. According to Source 3, what was life like for people living in Bahau?
7 A guerrilla is a member of an armed group that fights against larger military forces, usually by harassing them through surprise 
raids and sabotaging communication and supply lines. Map 6.1: Map of the Malay Peninsula showing the 
locations of the Endau and Bahau settlements
Pahang
Negeri Sembilan
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 33) ---
Pahang
Negeri Sembilan
JohorEndauBahau
Singapore
 Settlers ploughing the ground in Bahau to prepare 
for crop planting, c. 1944 Settlers clearing the jungle land in Bahau, c. 1943
24
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 34) ---
Poster for the propaganda movie The Fall 
of Singapore, about the Japanese attack on 
Singapore, 1942. This movie was presented by  
Eiga Haikyusha (the film unit of the Japanese 
Imperial Army), which took full control of film 
distribution and all theatres in Singapore.
 Concert programme poster by Allied POW William Haxworth, 1942Leisure and Entertainment
To maintain the appearance of a harmonious and happy society, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 34) ---
Japanese authorities allowed some leisure activities and entertainment to 
continue. They introduced radio programmes consisting of Japanese songs, 
Malay music, and news in Hokkien and Cantonese; Japanese movies and 
documentaries at cinemas; and free open-air screenings of propaganda 
shows.
In addition, the Japanese officials 
encouraged sports and cultural 
activities to reduce the stress of 
wartime conditions on the local 
population. Notices of football,  
baseball, tennis and badminton
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 34) ---
baseball, tennis and badminton 
matches appeared almost every 
day in the media. Boxing matches 
took place at Kim Seng Road, and 
the police band even performed at 
the Botanic Gardens.
Having to endure miserable living 
conditions, the POWs also tried 
to keep their spirits up by organising and participating in social, religious 
and sporting activities. These examples included publishing a newspaper, 
organising theatrical performances and church services, and painting
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 34) ---
murals at Changi Chapel.
William Haxworth (1906–1985) was 
a British civilian internee in Changi 
Prison and subsequently the Sime 
Road internment camp during the 
Japanese Occupation. During his 
internment, he secretly created over 
300 paintings and sketches that 
portrayed the poor living conditions 
in the POW camps. Faced with 
a shortage of drawing materials, 
Haxworth resorted to using whatever 
alternative materials he could lay 
his hands on to produce a variety of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 34) ---
his hands on to produce a variety of 
watercolour paintings and sketches. 
Over time, his drawings captured the 
transformation of internees from  
well-built men to gaunt figures of skin 
and bones.DID YOU KNOW?
 The Road Sweeper by Allied POW William 
Haxworth, 1945 Football team of the Syonan Sports Association, 
c. 1942. The Syonan Sports Association selected 
players from different football league teams to 
form the Singapore team.
25
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 34) ---
form the Singapore team.
25
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 35) ---
How Did the Locals Respond to 
Japanese Rule? 
There were varying responses to Japanese rule. The majority tried to avoid 
being noticed by the Japanese and simply get by from day to day. Some 
collaborated with the Japanese willingly while others were threatened or 
forced by circumstances to do so. Another group chose to actively resist.
Collaboration
The Japanese actively sought the support of the Malays in administering
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 35) ---
Japanese rule. Some of the duties given to the Malays included policing and 
being part of neighbourhood associations that would report on suspected 
hostile activity against the regime. 
Other groups were also enlisted to assist the Japanese in establishing their 
authority. They included some Chinese who became informants for the 
Kempeitai during Operation Sook Ching, helping to root out those seen to 
be anti-Japanese.
Resistance
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 35) ---
be anti-Japanese.
Resistance
However, not everyone was willing to cooperate or accept Japanese rule. 
For example, seven senior officers of the Malay Regiment refused to 
pledge loyalty to and fight for Japan. They were subsequently executed.
Others responded to the ill-treatment of the locals by taking up arms 
and joining resistance forces. Two prominent groups were the Malayan 
People’s Anti-Japanese Army (MPAJA) and Force 136. Both groups had
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 35) ---
the common goal of driving the Japanese out of Singapore and worked 
with the British to do so. Members of MPAJA 
would carry out sabotage attacks on Japanese 
officers and their men whenever they had the 
chance. As part of the resistance, they also 
aroused anti-Japanese sentiments among 
the people by distributing anti-Japanese 
newspapers and posters. Force 136,  
a secret organisation set up by the 
British, would gather information 
about the Japanese and also
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 35) ---
about the Japanese and also 
organise sabotage activities.
 MPAJA leader Chin Peng receiving British campaign 
medals from Admiral Mountbatten, c. 1945
 Members of Force 136, c. 1944
26
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
One notable figure in the resistance was Lim Bo Seng, 
a local businessman. When the war between Japan 
and China broke out in the 1930s, he organised anti-
Japanese activities such as a boycott of Japanese goods. 
After the fall of Singapore, he was recruited as an agent 
of Force 136 and also linked up with local resistance 
organisations such as the Malayan Communist Party 
to fight against the Japanese through guerrilla tactics. 
Unfortunately, in March 1944, he was captured and
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
tortured for information by the Japanese. Despite this, 
he did not reveal any information to his captors. Lim 
eventually died in prison on 29 June 1944.
Another prominent figure was Elizabeth Choy. During 
the Japanese Occupation, Choy worked as a canteen 
operator with her husband at the Mental Hospital 
(present-day Institute of Mental Health). They secretly 
delivered food, money, medicine and messages to 
British POWs. As a result, she was imprisoned and
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
tortured by the Japanese at the Kempeitai headquarters 
on Stamford Road for close to 200 days. After the war, 
however, she did not name her torturers, saying that 
they had acted that way because of war circumstances. 
In recognition of her courage, Choy was awarded the 
Order of the British Empire (OBE) and the Order of the 
Star of Sarawak.
Who was  
ELIZABETH CHOY?
?
Elizabeth Choy (1910–2006) was born in Kudat in North  
Borneo (present-day Sabah). During the Japanese
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
Borneo (present-day Sabah). During the Japanese 
Occupation, Elizabeth Choy was arrested by the Japanese 
for smuggling supplies and messages to British internees. 
Interrogated by the Kempeitai, she was released after 
enduring a period of starvation and torture. After the war, 
she was recognised as the only female local to have been 
imprisoned for such a long time.
While Choy is most well known for her bravery during 
the Japanese Occupation, she was also the only woman
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
nominated into Singapore’s Legislative Council in 1951. In 
1956, she became the first principal of the Singapore School 
for the Blind.
From 1960 to 1974, Choy dedicated 
her time to teaching at St Andrew’s 
Junior School. A committed and 
compassionate teacher, she was 
awarded the Pingat Bakti Setia (Long 
Service Medal) by the Government of 
Singapore in 1973 for her service 
to the profession.Who was  
LIM BO SENG?
?
Lim Bo Seng (1909–1944) was a prominent Hokkien
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
Lim Bo Seng (1909–1944) was a prominent Hokkien 
businessman who undertook active leadership in anti-
Japanese activities during World War II.
Lim came to Singapore from China at the age of 16. In the 
1930s, he was involved in activities to help support China’s 
war effort against Japan. As Japanese troops began to 
approach Singapore from Johor, he and his team helped to 
blow up the Causeway to impede the Japanese advance. Lim 
later escaped to India where he joined the British resistance
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
group Force 136. 
In 1943, Lim, together with the rest of the Force 136 members, 
set up an intelligence network in Malaya. However, in 1944, he 
was captured in Malaya by the Japanese and died shortly after 
in jail. 
In January 1946, the British brought Lim’s 
remains to Singapore. He was laid to rest with 
full military honours at MacRitchie Reservoir, 
where his grave still lies today. The Lim Bo 
Seng Memorial, located at Esplanade Park,  
was gazetted as a national monument in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
was gazetted as a national monument in 
2010. Bo Seng Avenue in Singapore is 
also named after him.
My duty and my honour 
would not permit me to 
look back. Every day, tens of 
thousands are dying for their 
countries. ... You must not 
grieve for me. On the other 
hand, you should take pride 
in my sacrifice and devote 
yourself to the upbringing of 
the children. Tell them what 
has happened to me and direct 
them along my footsteps.
 OBE medal awarded to Elizabeth Choy
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 36) ---
OBE medal awarded to Elizabeth Choy 
in 1946 Lim Bo Seng’s diary covering the 
period between 11 February and 
4 April 1942. The diary traces his 
evacuation from Singapore to 
Calcutta, India. Extract from the farewell letter Lim Bo Seng 
wrote to his wife while in prison in 1944
27
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 37) ---
In spite of its early dominance in Southeast Asia, Japan was eventually 
defeated in World War II. As the war dragged on, Japan experienced an 
increasing number of defeats by the Allies, such as in the Battle of Midway. 
The sea battles in particular helped to stall Japan’s advance throughout 
Southeast Asia. In 1945, Germany surrendered to the Allies, who then 
focused their resources on defeating Japan. 
On 6 and 9 August, the Allies dropped an atomic bomb each on the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 37) ---
Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki respectively. The estimated total 
death toll was 214,000. The bombs also caused massive damage in both 
cities. On 15 August 1945, Emperor Hirohito announced Japan’s surrender to 
the Allies. On 2 September 1945, the formal surrender of Japan took place 
on board an American battleship, the USS Missouri, in Tokyo Bay.With news of the impending 
surrender, more than 300 Japanese 
officers and men killed themselves
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 37) ---
officers and men killed themselves 
at Raffles Hotel after a farewell party 
in August 1945. There were also 
some Japanese soldiers who escaped 
to Indonesia to fight together with 
Indonesian pro-independence forces 
against the return of the Dutch. Others 
retreated to a prison camp in Jurong 
with their belongings, leaving only 
a few officers to hand over to the 
incoming British administration.DID YOU KNOW?
 US Navy planes in a massive formation over the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 37) ---
US Navy planes in a massive formation over the 
battleship USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay, where the 
Japanese surrender took place, 2 September 1945What Problems Did the People 
Face Immediately After the 
Japanese Surrender? 
28
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 38) ---
Upon their surrender, the Japanese were stripped of 
their swords and ranks. As they approached City Hall, 
huge crowds jeered loudly at them. The returning British, 
on the other hand, were welcomed with cheers.
With the end of the war, the MPAJA took revenge on 
those who had actively collaborated with the Japanese. 
These included the Chinese who served as informants 
and assisted in Operation Sook Ching, and Malays who 
served as police for the Japanese. The different ways in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 38) ---
which the Japanese had treated the various groups were 
to cause ill feelings for a long time to come. Read Source 
4 to find out more. British flag flying above a cheering crowd during the arrival of the British in 
Singapore, 1945
I think the Force 136, ... the guerrillas, ... [kept] on going [to the houses of] those people who ... tortured [others during 
Japanese rule], [rounded them up and shot] them all. ... I saw quite a lot [of dead people] floating in the Rochor River [and]
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 38) ---
Rochor Canal. ... After the Japanese surrender, ... everyone [took] their revenge. [There] were informers [and] police 
detectives, they [were hunted down and] killed by [the guerrillas]. 
– Adapted from a 1983 oral interview with Soh Guan Bee,  
who worked at the Naval Base Workshop during the Japanese OccupationSOURCE 4
1. According to Source 4, how were the pro-Japanese collaborators treated? 
2. Why were the pro-Japanese collaborators treated in this manner?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 38) ---
Admiral Mountbatten announcing the Japanese surrender at City Hall,  
12 September 1945
 Children in Singapore cheering British troops as they entered Singapore at the 
end of World War II, 1945
29
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 39) ---
The British Military Administration (BMA) was established and took over 
the administration of Singapore and Malaya from 5 September 1945 to  
31 March 1946. The BMA was made up of professional soldiers and former 
European civil servants who had joined the army during the war. It aimed 
to maintain law and order and help with reconstruction in the immediate 
post-war years. However, it faced a host of problems as Singapore was in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 39) ---
disarray. For instance, food and water were in short supply and the railway 
system did not work properly.
Food Shortages
The most urgent issue was the shortage of food. This was due to wartime  
and post-war disruptions of production and shipping. Rice-producing 
countries such as Thailand were unable to produce enough rice to sell 
overseas. Furthermore, it was difficult for rice that was produced to even 
reach and be distributed in Singapore, as the war had destroyed a large
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 39) ---
number of merchant ships. In addition, sunken ships blocked the harbour 
and few warehouses were available for storage.
The BMA dealt with the problem gradually by clearing the harbour so that 
ships could enter the port. It also controlled the prices of essential supplies 
such as sugar, salt, fresh fish and vegetables, and provided free meals for 
children under six years old.
Economic Difficulties
On 7 September 1945, the BMA declared that banana notes were no longer
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 39) ---
the official currency of Singapore. This meant that those who had not kept 
the Straits dollar had to borrow from others to survive.
To ease the situation, the BMA issued special grants to the locals. However, 
the grants were often not sufficient for large families to make ends meet. 
Schooling Disruptions
Despite Japanese promises of greater educational opportunities, the war 
had disrupted the schooling of many people in Singapore. To ensure the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 39) ---
continuation of education, the BMA reopened schools quickly in October 
1945 for children of schooling age as well as overaged children who had 
received little education during the Japanese Occupation. They also 
provided grants and waived school fees for children from needy families. 
By March 1946, 62,000 students were enrolled in schools. 
Read Source 5 on the next page to find out more about the situation in 
schools after the British returned.
 Present-day Hotel Fort Canning, the former
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 39) ---
Present-day Hotel Fort Canning, the former 
headquarters of the BMA
 Envelope stamped with the BMA postmark “Delay 
Your Spending”, c. 1945. Food rationing continued 
during the BMA period, and many envelopes used 
during this time were stamped with this postmark to 
encourage people to remain prudent.
 First post-war staff and students of Sin Sheng 
School at Kampong Kembangan, 1940s. The school 
was closed in 1972.
30
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 40) ---
Conclusion 
With the return of the British, people expected their lives to improve. 
However, this did not happen immediately. While the BMA did act to deal 
with the post-war problems, the measures took time to implement and 
take effect. This led to growing discontent among the local population, 
which sparked off social disturbances in the 1950s. As the post-war 
problems dragged on, desire also grew among the local population to have
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 40) ---
freedom from British rule and control of their own future. You will explore 
these issues further in the next chapter.
After the British returned, the Malay schools were in a mess … there were many shortages, many books (Malay textbooks) 
were destroyed during the Occupation. There were no proper blackboards, no textbooks. So the Department of Education 
formed a department out of about ten people and our task was to produce emergency teaching materials for the schools
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 40) ---
until proper textbooks were ready. We had to produce the materials as fast as we could, they were like in pamphlet form. 
We would print them and then distribute them to students.
– An account of the situation in schools after the British return by Haji Yusof bin Lana,  
a teacher from Telok Kurau Primary School, published in 1995SOURCE 5
1. According to Source 5, what problems did schools face at the end of the war? 
2. How were these problems overcome?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 40) ---
2. How were these problems overcome?
 Street scene in Singapore after the Japanese 
Occupation, c. 1945
31
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 41) ---
In this chapter, you learnt that the experiences of the people in Singapore were not all the same during the 
Japanese Occupation. Imagine you were one of the following individuals during the Japanese Occupation:
a. a Chinese businessman;
b. a Malay student learning Japanese in school; or
c. an Indian soldier thinking about joining the anti-British INA. 
What would you have experienced between February 1942 and September 1945? Write it down in the diary 
on the next page.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 41) ---
on the next page.
In your diary entries, use what you learnt in this chapter to write about two different types of experiences 
that you would have encountered during the Japanese Occupation. Remember to also highlight significant 
events you might have witnessed and emotions you might have felt. 
You may use the following types of experiences to help you complete the diary entries:
• survival 
• leisure and entertainment
• collaboration 
• resistance
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 41) ---
• collaboration 
• resistance
An example has been provided based on the character of a POW in Changi Prison.LET’S REVIEW
Experience 1:  Survival
Date:  24 February 1942
Dear Diary,
Alas! Singapore, the impregnable fortress, has fallen to 
the Japanese!
We were forced to march for a long time to Changi Prison. 
The other Allied POWs are also being kept here. Every 
day, we lack food and are hungry. We have to work long 
hours and are not given enough to eat. We even have to
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 41) ---
plant our own vegetables and add talcum powder to our 
rice porridge in order to have a fuller meal.Experience 2:  Leisure and Entertainment
Date:  15 June 1945
Dear Diary, 
On certain days, we try to keep our spirits high by 
organising activities and events. Sometimes we have the 
opportunity to attend plays and variety shows. Some 
of my fellow prisoners are so talented at theatrical 
performances! We also smuggle in paints and brushes for
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 41) ---
painting on the walls of the chapel. In tough times, we 
do all that we can to keep sane and make the hardship 
more bearable. If only we could be liberated …Diary of Private Joseph Chapman 
32
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 42) ---
Write your diary entries in the spaces provided below. 
Experience 1: 
Date: 
Dear Diary, 
Experience 2: 
Date: 
Dear Diary, Diary of 
33
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 43) ---
One of the priorities of the Japanese was to remove all traces of Western colonial influence and to firmly 
establish Japanese authority over the locals. In addition to using force to ensure the submission of the 
locals, the Japanese used propaganda to win over local support for their rule. They used channels such as 
posters, newspaper articles and speeches to communicate their messages. In this Case Investigation, you
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 43) ---
will explore how the Japanese used the various forms of propaganda and examine the messages they sought 
to convey to the locals. What key propaganda messages were used by the Japanese to  
convince the locals to support their rule during the Japanese Occupation?CASE INVESTIGATION
We ... hope that we sweep away the arrogant and unrighteous British elements and share pain and rejoicing with all
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 43) ---
concerned peoples in a spirit of “give and take” and also hope to promote the social developments by ... giving all content 
to the respective race and individual according to their talents ... Nippon army will drastically expel and punish those 
who ... indulge themselves in private interests and wants, those who act against humanity or disturb the public order and 
peace and those who are against the orders and disturb the military action of Nippon army.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 43) ---
– Adapted from a speech by General Yamashita from The Syonan Jit Poh,  
a Chinese language version of The Syonan Times, published on 20 February 1942SOURCE A
Every family must have its protector to ensure safety and security for its members for without such protection its progress 
is impossible ... In Nippon, the Asian family of nations has found a protector from among themselves, a protector brave
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 43) ---
enough and strong enough to ensure its safety and security ... They must cooperate with their only liberator, Nippon, one 
of their own flesh and blood, one who shares their mighty civilisation, one whose heart beats in unison with theirs in their 
aims and aspirations … [Nippon is the] one whose … bravest and best sons in their thousands and tens of thousands have 
dared, suffered and died for Asians to make that splendid vision of a united, free, prosperous and happy Asia a reality.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 43) ---
– Adapted from an extract from The Syonan Times, published in March 1942SOURCE B
34
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 44) ---
Photograph depicting a scene from Polling Day, 30 May 1959
– Cover of a magazine on the Manifesto * for Greater East Asian Cooperation, published in 1942
* A manifesto is a written statement by a political party publicly stating its intentions, motives or view.SOURCE C
35
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 45) ---
– Photograph of local students learning Japanese in school,  
published in a Japanese newspaper on 22 July 1942SOURCE D
1. Read Source A. What does the speech tell you about how the Japanese saw themselves as rulers of 
Singapore? 
2. Study Sources B and C. What do these sources tell you about Japan’s vision or goals for Asia?
3. Study Source D. Why did the Japanese publish this photograph in the newspaper? INVESTIGATE!
36
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 46) ---
Having studied the sources, what can you conclude about the key messages of Japanese propaganda during 
the Japanese Occupation?
Summarise your conclusions below. Remember to use evidence from the sources to support your ideas. An 
example has been provided for your reference.REPORT!
What Were the Key Messages of Japanese Propaganda During the Japanese Occupation?
Source Key Point Supporting Evidence from Source(s)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 46) ---
A The Japanese were fair and just rulers.It states that the Japanese sought to “giv[e] 
all content to the respective race and 
individual according to their talents”.
B
C
D
Based on the sources above, I can conclude that the key messages of Japanese propaganda during the 
Japanese Occupation were …
37
WHAT DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE EXPERIENCE DURING THE JAPANESE OCCUPATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 48) ---
Chinese middle school students gathering at the foot of King George V Park (present-day Fort Canning Park) 
for a march to Government House (present-day Istana) to petition against the National Service Ordinance 
passed by the British, 13 May 1954
39
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?The Japanese Occupation left a deep impression on those who lived 
through it. While happy cries greeted the return of British rule, the people
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 48) ---
in Singapore no longer viewed their colonial masters in the same way 
as before. The swift fall of the supposedly “impregnable fortress” (see 
Chapter 5) and the subsequent hardship during the Japanese Occupation 
(see Chapter 6) had led many to question Britain’s right to rule Singapore. 
Events that occurred beyond Singapore after the war also influenced the 
way people viewed colonial rule.
In this chapter, you will learn about British actions and the people’s
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 48) ---
aspirations in the post-war years, and how these led to Singapore achieving 
internal self-government in 1959.CHAPTER  
7
How Did the People in Singapore Respond 
to British Rule After World War II?
You will learn:
• How external developments 
in the post-war period 
affected Singapore
• How the British dealt with 
post-war problems in 
Singapore
• How the locals responded to 
British rule in the post-war 
period
• How Singapore eventually 
attained full internal
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 48) ---
attained full internal  
self-government in 1959Chapter at a Glance
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 49) ---
Beyond Singapore
The British return to 
Singapore and set up 
the British Military 
Administration (BMA).World War II ends.The Cold War between 
the United States and 
the Soviet Union begins.
India gains 
independence 
from Britain.The Malayan Emergency 
is declared.
Indonesia gains  
independence from 
the Netherlands.The Communist Party of  
China emerges victorious  
in the Chinese Civil War.
The BMA comes 
to an end.
Singapore holds its 
first-ever election, as 
six members of the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 49) ---
first-ever election, as 
six members of the 
Legislative Council 
are chosen by voters.The Maria Hertogh 
Riots break out.Singapore 
holds its 
second 
election.In Singapore
 Members of the Legislative 
Council, 1948 Admiral Mountbatten announcing 
the Japanese surrender at City Hall, 
12 September 1945 Car overturned and set on 
fire during the Maria Hertogh 
Riots, December 1950 Japanese General Umezu Yoshijiro 
signing the surrender documents  
on board the USS Missouri,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 49) ---
on board the USS Missouri,  
2 September 1945 British troops arriving in 
Singapore at the start of the 
Malayan Emergency, 1948
1947 1950 1951 1945 1946 1948 1949
40
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)Timeline
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 50) ---
The Rendel 
Commission 
is set up.
The Anti-National 
Service Riots break 
out.Talks begin to discuss 
French withdrawal 
from Vietnam.Malaya gains independence 
from Britain. 
The Labour 
Front wins the 
1955 election.
The First 
Merdeka Talks 
are held.The Second 
Merdeka Talks 
are held.The PAP wins the 
1959 election.
The Hock 
Lee Bus Riots 
break out.
The Chinese 
Middle School 
Student Riots 
break out. The 
Citizenship 
Ordinance is 
passed.Singapore achieves 
full internal
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 50) ---
passed.Singapore achieves 
full internal  
self-government.
Yusof bin Ishak 
is sworn in as 
Singapore’s Head 
of State, the Yang 
di-Pertuan Negara.
 Clash between Chinese 
middle school students 
and the police, May 1954 Yusof bin Ishak being sworn 
in as the Yang di-Pertuan 
Negara, 3 December 1959 Vietnamese defeat the French  
in the Battle of Dien Bien Phu,  
resulting in negotiations for  
French withdrawal from  
Vietnam, 1954 Malayan Prime Minister Tunku Abdul
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 50) ---
Vietnam, 1954 Malayan Prime Minister Tunku Abdul 
Rahman proclaiming independence 
for Malaya, 31 August 1957
1957 1953 1954 1955 1956 1959
41
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 51) ---
How Did External Developments 
Influence the People’s Responses 
to British Rule After World War II?
The changes that took place in Singapore after World War II occurred against 
the backdrop of several external developments. These developments were 
important in influencing the people’s responses to British rule, and also in 
shaping the thinking and actions of the British. Let us now learn more about 
them.
Weakening of Colonial Rule
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 51) ---
them.
Weakening of Colonial Rule
Even before World War II, anti-colonial sentiments had arisen in many 
places due to the suffering caused by European colonial rule. The defeat of 
European forces by an Asian power, the Japanese Empire, and the subsequent  
Japanese Occupation further accelerated the growth of anti-colonial 
feelings. 
After the Japanese surrender, people in different places saw the chance to 
rise up against their European colonial rulers and take control of their own
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 51) ---
destinies. India, the most populous British colony, gained independence 
in 1947. Two years later, Indonesia gained independence from the Dutch. 
In 1954, the Vietnamese overthrew their French colonial masters. Colonial 
rule in Asia appeared to be weakening. As news of these events travelled, 
they encouraged those who had long wished to be free from British rule.
 Mohandas K. Gandhi, leader of the Indian 
independence movement Sukarno, leader of the Indonesian independence
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 51) ---
movement Ho Chi Minh, leader of the Vietnamese 
independence movement
42
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 52) ---
Growing Influence of Communism
A new kind of conflict emerged at the end of World War II. This conflict 
became known as the Cold  War.1 It was a conflict between two very 
powerful countries: the United States and the Soviet Union (officially the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or USSR). Both had large populations, 
strong militaries and rich resources. Although they had been allies during 
World War II, their differences in ideology2 made continued cooperation
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 52) ---
after the war unsustainable. Let us look at some of these differences in 
ideology and how they contributed to tensions after World War II.
1 A cold war refers to a state of tension between two people or groups without open or violent confrontation.
2 An ideology is a set of ideas. In this case, they are ideas about how a country should be run. They attempt to answer questions 
such as:
 i Who should have control in the country?
 ii How should wealth in the country be created and shared?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 52) ---
iii How important are people’s individual interests compared to society’s overall interests? Figure 7.1: Differences in ideology between the United States and the Soviet UnionDictatorship *
Upheld one-party rule: 
only the Communist 
Party was allowed
* A dictatorship is a form of 
government in which a person 
or a small group rules with 
almost unlimited power.
Government Ownership
Believed goods should be allocated 
to people according to their 
needs. Thus, the government
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 52) ---
needs. Thus, the government 
would control all resources 
needed to produce these goods, 
such as factories and farms
Community Before Individual
Regarded individual freedom  
as less important than 
the benefit of societyDemocracy
Believed in 
free elections 
which could be 
contested by 
more than one 
political party
Private Ownership
Upheld private enterprise and 
property ownership: 
people could own 
businesses, and buy 
and sell goods
Individual Before Community
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 52) ---
and sell goods
Individual Before Community
Valued individual freedomDemocracy/Capitalism Communism
Who should have 
control in the 
country?
Ideology
How should wealth 
in the country be 
created and shared?
How important are 
people’s individual 
interests compared 
to society’s overall 
interests?
NON-CO/M_M.ligaUNIST 
PARTY
United States Soviet Union
43
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 53) ---
Communist ideas appealed to many who felt unfairly treated 
by those who governed them. In Europe during the late 19th 
and early 20th centuries, the idea of a more equal society was 
attractive to those who suffered exploitation by powerful rulers 
or wealthy land and business owners. 
Under the communist dictatorship of the Soviet Union, political freedom was severely limited. The 
government seized property previously owned by individuals, such as private farms, and placed
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 53) ---
them under the state’s control. Many who opposed the government were arrested or killed.After a violent civil war, the Russian communists succeeded in 
establishing the Soviet Union. In their efforts to create a communist 
system, however, they established a dictatorship to give themselves 
more power to shape society according to their goals.In 1917, communists in Russia * tried to overthrow 
the country’s leaders and take control.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 53) ---
the country’s leaders and take control. 
* Before 1917, Russia was a vast empire extending from Eastern 
Europe to the Pacific Ocean. After the formation of the Soviet Union, 
Russia became one of the territories in the Soviet Union.and the SOVIET UNION and the SOVIET UNION The RISE of COMMUNISM The RISE of COMMUNISM 
44
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 54) ---
Communism opposed colonial rule for its exploitation of people. Thus it 
found many supporters in European colonies such as Vietnam, Indonesia 
and Malaya before they had gained independence. As an ally of the United 
States in the Cold War, Britain was concerned that its colonies, such as 
Malaya and Singapore, would fall under communist control in their fight 
for independence. In Singapore, the Malayan Communist Party (MCP) 
had considerable popular support. Many people, especially those in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 54) ---
the Chinese community, remembered how the MCP had helped in the 
resistance against the Japanese during World War II. 
Now that the war was over, the MCP turned its attention to ending British 
rule and establishing communist governments in Malaya and Singapore. 
In Singapore, amid post-war economic difficulties, the MCP worked to 
influence trade unions3 and Chinese-medium schools, stirring up anti-
colonial feelings among the workers and students. It also attacked rubber
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 54) ---
plantations and tin mines in Malaya, many of which were owned and 
managed by the British. The MCP’s actions further heightened British fears. 
When three European rubber planters in Malaya were murdered in June 
1948, the British took action against the MCP. A State of Emergency was 
declared throughout Malaya, and in the following month, the MCP was 
declared illegal. The Malayan Emergency lasted from 1948 to 1960. By the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 54) ---
time it ended, the conflict had killed or wounded several thousand civilians 
and military personnel.
3 A trade union is an organisation formed by workers to protect their rights and interests. It often looks into issues such as salaries 
and working conditions.
 Front page of the newspaper The Singapore Free 
Press, 16 June 1948
 British troops patrolling in Malaya during the Malayan Emergency, 1957In 1950, the MCP attempted to 
assassinate the Governor of Singapore,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 54) ---
assassinate the Governor of Singapore, 
Sir Franklin Gimson. This was among 
the numerous acts of violence and 
sabotage carried out by the MCP 
during the Emergency. One year later, 
the MCP succeeded in assassinating 
Sir Henry Gurney, the High 
Commissioner of Malaya.DID YOU KNOW?
 Road to Fraser’s Hill in present-day Malaysia, 
where Henry Gurney was assassinated in 1951
45
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 55) ---
It became very obvious to all of us that not only would such a law restrict trade union powers, it would also take away 
the [MCP]’s right to lead the trade union movement. The next step would have been the outright banning of our party. We 
would have to be prepared. If the banning took place, we would have no option but to fight. Subsequently, the law was 
passed … It was within this context and in this mood that we went on to accept we had no option now but to wage war for 
our principles.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 55) ---
our principles.
– Adapted from an account by MCP leader Chin Peng from his memoir,  
My Side of History, published in 2003. Leading MCP members had been handed a stolen document  
containing details of a proposed law that would restrict trade union powers (see page 49). 
[The Japanese Occupation contributed to a] political awakening in Singapore. Perhaps it was because the Japanese
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 55) ---
conquerors were harsh taskmasters; perhaps it was because the all-powerful Europeans were humiliated into defeat by 
Asian five-footers;* perhaps it was the awakening of India’s century-old struggle to free herself from British [control]; 
perhaps it was Mao’s struggle [in China] ... Perhaps it was a combination of all these factors that led Malayans and 
Singaporeans to … act. From then on the target was independence.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 55) ---
– Rajabali Jumabhoy reflecting on the post-war attitudes of the people, adapted from a  
1981 oral interview. Jumabhoy was 47 years old when the Japanese Occupation came to an end.
* “Five-footers” refer to people who are around 5 feet (approximately 1.52 metres) tall.SOURCE 1
SOURCE 21. According to Source 1, why did the MCP begin taking violent measures to achieve its objectives?
British concerns over the growing influence of communism deepened
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 55) ---
after 1949 with the victory of the Communist Party of China (CPC), led by 
Mao Zedong, in the Chinese Civil War. China, the world’s most populous 
country, had entered the communist bloc.4 Given the sizeable Chinese 
immigrant population in Malaya and Singapore and their traditionally close 
ties to China, the British feared that the appeal of communist ideas would 
grow among them. Read Source 2 to find out more.Read Source 1 below to find out more about why the MCP felt it had to
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 55) ---
resort to violence.
Britain wanted to reassert its rule over Malaya and Singapore after World 
War II and had drawn up plans for this. However, the British failed to 
recognise how their surrender to the Japanese during World War II had 
changed people’s attitudes towards them, and there was fierce resistance 
to the British plans to reassert colonial rule. The British thus had to adapt 
their plans by addressing the people’s concerns and winning their support.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 55) ---
4 A bloc is an alliance or group of states that share common interests, values or beliefs.
 Mao Zedong, leader of the CPC
1. According to Source 2, what factors contributed to the “political awakening” in Singapore during the post-war period?
2. Why do you think a “political awakening” was important to Singapore in its path to independence?
46
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 56) ---
5 A baby boom is a period marked by a substantial increase in birth rate. Singapore’s first baby boom started in 1946, which saw 
38,654 live births, a 58% increase from 24,441 in 1945. This baby boom lasted for almost two decades.
6 A slum is an overcrowded, dirty and run-down city area, usually inhabited by the very poor.
Today, Chinatown is … over-congested … [Large masses of people] are crammed into it. Chinatown is full – but more are
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 56) ---
coming into it … “Almost inhuman” was the description given by a [health officer] to the conditions under which a large 
part of the city’s cubicle dwellers existed. The situation is worse today. Where formerly a tiny cubicle in Chinatown housed 
a man, his wife and [their] growing family, today, in many instances, it holds a portion of some other family as well.
– Newspaper report from The Singapore Free Press, published on 16 May 1946SOURCE 3
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 56) ---
1. According to Source 3, what were the living conditions like in Chinatown?How Did the British 
Attempt to Win Local 
Support? 
Although the people in Singapore were relieved and 
overjoyed when the war ended, they soon realised 
the post-war period was not without problems. Living 
conditions, for instance, did not seem to improve as 
much or as quickly as many had hoped. The British 
needed to address these problems if they were to win 
the people’s support. 
Meeting Housing Challenges
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 56) ---
the people’s support. 
Meeting Housing Challenges
One problem was the shortage of housing. Much 
housing had been destroyed or become run-down 
during wartime. Furthermore, Singapore’s population 
was rapidly growing as it experienced a post-war 
baby boom5 and had one of the highest birth rates 
in the world in the 1940s and 1950s. As a result, many 
people lived in increasingly overcrowded conditions. 
A significant portion of the population lived in slums.6 
Read Source 3 to find out more.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 56) ---
Read Source 3 to find out more.
 Interior of a slum dwelling in Bukit Ho Swee Estate, 1947
47
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 57) ---
Read Source 4 to learn about the first People’s Restaurant.
[The Social Welfare Department] started the People’s Restaurant. The first one was in Telok Ayer. … They built an attap 
[house] with a barbed wire fencing right round it and they got cooks to cook. And for 35 cents [equivalent to around $5 
today] which was very cheap, they [would] get rice, vegetables, a piece of meat or a piece of fish and a cup of black tea
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 57) ---
thrown in … Between 12 and 2 o’clock [in the afternoon] we served about two, three thousand meals.
– Adapted from a 1984 oral interview with Tan Beng Neo, who worked  
at the Social Welfare Department, a government department, from 1947 to 1969SOURCE 4
1. According to Source 4, how well did the People’s Restaurants meet the people’s need for food? 
 Workers having lunch at a People’s Restaurant,  
c. 1946 SIT flats in Tiong Bahru Estate, c. 1953
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 57) ---
c. 1946 SIT flats in Tiong Bahru Estate, c. 1953
To address the problem, the Singapore Improvement Trust (SIT) accelerated 
its building programme. The SIT had been established in 1927 by the British 
to provide low-cost housing. Between 1947 and 1959, it built 20,907 housing 
and shop units. This worked out to an average of 1,742 units per year, which 
was far below the estimated 10,000 units per year required to meet the 
growing population’s housing needs. Despite the SIT’s efforts, housing
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 57) ---
shortages persisted and many continued to live in cramped conditions 
throughout the 1950s.
Addressing Food Shortages
Food was also in short supply, a problem made worse by the growing 
population. The war had disrupted shipping, affecting the flow of food 
supplies into Singapore. Besides, neighbouring rice-producing countries 
did not have enough rice to export to Singapore. Wartime food rationing 
continued. Malnutrition was widespread and wages could not keep up
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 57) ---
with the rising food prices.
The British were worried that the food shortages would lead to widespread 
unrest. To avoid this, they established People’s Restaurants to provide 
affordable meals. By the end of 1946, there were 10 People’s Restaurants in 
Singapore.
48
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 58) ---
Managing Industrial Unrest
Unsatisfactory working conditions, together with the housing and food 
shortages, led to a wave of strikes7 during the post-war period. Thousands 
of workers from various industries took part in these strikes. In 1947 alone, 
known as “The Year of Strikes” , there were over 300 strikes in Singapore, 
involving almost 70,000 workers. Some of these strikes lasted for weeks. 
Many workers who took part in the strikes were members of trade unions. The
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 58) ---
trade unions, whose members also included English-educated men such as 
Devan Nair, Jamit Singh and Sidney Woodhull, were concerned with improving 
workers’ conditions. Many trade union members wanted immediate change 
to their working conditions and went on strike to secure their demands.
British officials suspected that communists working within the trade unions 
were stirring up anti-colonial feelings and instigating the strikes. Thus, laws
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 58) ---
were passed in an attempt to control the trade unions. From 1947, all 
unions had to register with the government. This enabled the government 
to monitor their membership. The unions were also no longer allowed to 
use their funds to organise strikes and protests against the government. 
Nevertheless, trade unions continued to be active and industrial unrest
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 58) ---
remained an issue in the 1950s. Members of the Singapore Harbour Board Staff Association at a meeting to plan for a strike for higher pay 
and better working conditions, 1953 
7 A strike occurs when workers refuse to work as a way to get their employers to agree to their demands, such as higher pay or 
better working conditions.Who was  
DEVAN NAIR?
?
Devan Nair (1923–2005) was born 
in 1923 near Melaka, Malaya, and 
moved to Singapore with his family 
when he was 10. Influenced by
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 58) ---
when he was 10. Influenced by 
family members who supported the 
Indian independence movement, he 
developed anti-British sentiments 
in his youth. After the Japanese 
Occupation, he worked as a teacher, 
becoming a prominent member of 
the Singapore Teachers’ Union and 
fighting for workers’ rights. In 1951, 
he was arrested by the British for his 
participation in anti-colonial activities.
Nair joined the PAP in 1954 but was 
again detained for his role in anti-
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 58) ---
again detained for his role in anti-
colonial activities in 1956. He was 
released in 1959 when the PAP came 
to power and played a leading role 
in the establishment of the National 
Trades Union Congress (NTUC) two 
years later. He won a parliamentary 
seat representing the Anson 
constituency in 1979, the same year 
he became President of the NTUC. In 
1981, he became the third President of 
Singapore and continued to champion 
workers’ rights. He resigned in 1985 
due to health reasons.
49
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 58) ---
due to health reasons.
49
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 59) ---
Coolies transporting goods along the Singapore 
River, 1948Rebuilding the Economy
Economic recovery was crucial to improving the lives of people in 
Singapore. Without the revival of trade and industry, people would not 
have jobs and the government would not have sufficient tax revenues to 
pay for programmes that improved people’s welfare.
The British thus repaired the ports that had been damaged during the 
war, restoring Singapore’s status as an important trading centre. This was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 59) ---
a significant move as worldwide demand for tin and rubber was growing. 
The volume of trade eventually surpassed pre-war levels. This expansion 
of trade, together with greater control of trade union activities and 
abundant food harvests in 1948, ended the worst shortages and hardships 
in Singapore.
As a port city, Singapore continued to survive through the 1950s on its 
entrepôt trade, as it did in the 19th century. It also processed and exported
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 59) ---
raw materials from Malaya and Indonesia, such as oil, tin, rubber and timber.
Allowing Local Political Participation
In another bid to win local support, the British held an election in 1948. 
For the first time, the people in Singapore were given a say in who would 
represent them in the Legislative Council. 
The election was based on the British model. See Figure 7.2 on the next 
page to learn more about the election process in Singapore.
50
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 60) ---
Figure 7.2: Election process in SingaporePeople who have similar ideas 
on how a country should be 
run form a group, called a 
political party.
A political party can only 
implement its ideas by forming 
the government, either by itself 
or together with another party. 
To do so, it contests elections.Some candidates also contest 
elections as independents. This 
means that they do not belong 
to any political party.
On polling day, voters vote for 
the candidate(s) whose ideas
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 60) ---
the candidate(s) whose ideas 
they most agree with.
The candidate with the most 
votes in an area is elected as 
the representative of that area 
in the government. 
The party with the most 
elected candidates wins the 
election and gets to form the 
government. *
* The 1948 election was limited to 
electing six representatives in 
the Legislative Council. They did 
not form the government, which 
was still controlled by the British 
(see Figure 7.4 on pages 72–73).
1
2
3
4
5
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 60) ---
(see Figure 7.4 on pages 72–73).
1
2
3
4
5
6The Election Process in Singapore
In the lead-up to the elections, 
parties and candidates hold 
campaigns to share their ideas 
and win support.
51
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 61) ---
The 1948 election was the first step towards democracy. However, 
participation among the people was very low. Many recent immigrants 
were not allowed to vote as they were not born in Britain or in the British 
colonies. In the end, only about 22,000 people were registered to vote, 
and only 14,000 voters actually turned up. This was a small fraction of the 
total population, which numbered around 960,000.
Only one party, the Singapore Progressive Party (SPP), contested the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 61) ---
election, making it the first political party to do so in Singapore. The SPP 
won three out of the six elected seats. The remaining three were won by 
independent candidates. Out of the 22,395 people registered to vote in 1948, 10,141 were Indians and 5,627 
were Chinese. These are shocking figures, since the Indians numbered 71,928 while 
the Chinese numbered 747,817 (out of a total population of 961,856)! DID YOU KNOW?
Composition of Registered Voters in 1948
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 61) ---
Composition of Registered Voters in 1948
Ethnic Groups No. of Voters % of Total Voters
Chinese 5,627 25
Indians 10,141 45
Malays 3,146 14
Others 3,481 16
Total 22,395 100
 Taken from Yeo Kim Wah, Political Development in Singapore, 1945–1955, published in 1973 
What does the 1948 election 
tell you about British attitudes 
towards the locals?Think!
The SPP was led by Tan Chye Cheng (C. C. Tan), John Laycock 
and Nazir Ahmad Mallal. Its members were mostly English-
speaking professionals.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 61) ---
speaking professionals. 
The party believed in gradual self-government and worked 
closely with the British. It championed equal treatment for local 
and European civil servants, and fought to provide financial 
security for workers in their retirement.SINGAPORE PROGRESSIVE PARTY (SPP)
Founded in 
August 1947
 C. C. Tan accepting his victory at the 1948 election
 Members of the Legislative Council, 1948
52
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 62) ---
Why Were There Riots in the 
Early 1950s? 
Despite British attempts to improve living conditions and grant more 
political participation, sources of discontent remained. Major riots broke 
out in the first half of the 1950s, making it a turbulent period in Singapore’s 
history.
Maria Hertogh Riots
The first of the riots took place in late 1950, when a custody8 battle over 
a 13-year-old girl caught the public’s attention. The girl’s name was Maria
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 62) ---
Hertogh. Read the illustrated story on the next page to find out more.
8 Custody is the legal right or duty to provide protection and care for someone. Maria and her foster mother, Che Aminah, 1950
 Maria (centre) leaving the court after the hearing 
of her case, with Che Aminah on her left,  
24 November 1950
 Che Aminah (centre) leaving the Supreme Court 
after her appeal was rejected, 11 December 1950
 Protesters outside the Supreme Court 
at the start of the Maria Hertogh Riots,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 62) ---
at the start of the Maria Hertogh Riots,  
11 December 1950
53
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 63) ---
Maria was born in Java in 1937 to Dutch Catholic 
parents. When Maria’s father was imprisoned in 
1942 during the Japanese Occupation, Maria’s 
mother, Adeline Hertogh, left her in the care of 
a local family friend, Che Aminah. Maria was 
renamed Nadra binte Ma’arof and raised in the 
Muslim faith. After the war, Maria and her foster 
family moved to Malaya.
While the case was under appeal, some 
newspapers published sensationalised 
stories about Maria’s life in the convent.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 63) ---
stories about Maria’s life in the convent. 
The case was also portrayed as a religious 
issue between Islam and Christianity. Many 
Muslims were upset as they felt that their 
religion was being disrespected. 
Troops were sent to the scenes, but the riots continued for 
three days. In response to the violence, a curfew was imposed. 
By the end of the riots, 18 people had been killed and 173 injured. In 1950, Adeline tried to reclaim her daughter by making
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 63) ---
a case to the court in Singapore. The British judge ruled 
that Maria be returned to her natural parents. Adeline 
placed Maria in a Catholic convent while waiting to 
return to the Netherlands. In response, Che Aminah 
appealed against the judge’s decision.
The judge eventually rejected Che Aminah’s appeal. Feeling 
that the British had sided unfairly with the Dutch, Che Aminah’s 
supporters reacted angrily. They overturned cars on the streets
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 63) ---
and set them on fire. They also attacked any Europeans and 
Eurasians in sight.The MARIA HERTOGH RIOTS The MARIA HERTOGH RIOTS 
54
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 64) ---
In 1950, 80% of the government’s 
education budget went to English-
medium schools while only 6% was 
allocated to Chinese-medium schools. DID YOU KNOW?
9 A demonstration refers to a public display of feelings by a group or groups of people towards a person, event or cause.Anti-National Service Riots
The Anti-National Service Riots of 1954, like the Maria Hertogh Riots, were 
an expression of anti-colonial feelings. The post-war British government
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 64) ---
felt that the responsibility of defending Singapore should be spread more 
evenly among the population. The Emergency also increased the urgency 
of improving the defence of Singapore. With these in mind, the National 
Service Ordinance was passed in 1953, requiring all males aged between 18 
and 20 to register for National Service by May 1954. Those who failed to 
do so would be jailed or fined. 
The announcement was deeply unpopular among secondary students
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 64) ---
from Chinese-medium schools. Many of them were old enough to qualify 
for National Service as the war had disrupted their education. If they were 
to register for National Service, their studies would be disrupted again. 
Moreover, the students felt that the British discriminated against Chinese 
education while favouring English-medium schools. As you learnt in Chapter 3,  
the British provided little support to Chinese-medium schools. The
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 64) ---
students were thus unwilling to register for National Service to defend 
a foreign government that did not seem to give them anything in return. 
To show their unhappiness, about 500 students held a protest march on 
13 May 1954. In response, the British deployed riot police equipped with 
batons and shields. The initially peaceful demonstration9 turned violent 
as the students clashed with the police, leaving 26 injured. 
The British ordered the closure of all Chinese-medium schools across
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 64) ---
Singapore the following day, but this only escalated the unrest. On  
22 May, thousands of students locked themselves in classrooms at 
Chung Cheng High School in protest. They sang songs, held their 
own lessons and even went on a hunger strike. As a result of the 
protests, the British government decided to postpone the registration  
for National Service. 
The incident boosted the morale and strength of the 
Chinese-educated students. It encouraged them to be
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 64) ---
more politically active and resulted in the formation of 
student groups such as the Singapore Chinese Middle 
School Students’ Union (SCMSSU). Many in the Chinese 
community also sympathised with the students and 
disapproved of the use of violence by the police.
 Police trying to control the crowd of students,  
May 1954
Clash between the students and the police, May 1954
55
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 65) ---
How Did the British Respond to 
the Changing Attitudes of the 
Locals? 
With the unrest of the early 1950s, the British knew things had to change. 
They saw the locals’ discontent and their anti-British sentiments, and 
recognised that the old system of government was no longer adequate. 
The locals had to be granted more political power. 
Read Source 5 to learn more about the British decision to transfer more 
power to the people.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 65) ---
power to the people.
Now, this time … we were trying to make people proud of belonging to a city. … We were really trying to get people away 
from the feeling that they had no participation in the running of Singapore. In the old days, … [the British] arranged 
everything and [the locals did not] have to do anything. All [the locals had] to do [was] to go to school and take a job
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 65) ---
and live [their] lives ... This was … disappearing. The feeling was: ... [the] people in Singapore ... must run Singapore 
[themselves]. Well, [one] way of building [this feeling] up was to make them feel [like] citizens in a big, important city and 
[Singapore was] being recognised as such [a place].
– Adapted from a 1982 oral interview with Sir Percy McNeice,  
a senior British official in Singapore during the late 1940s and 1950sSOURCE 5
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 65) ---
1. According to Source 5, why did the British decide to give the people in Singapore more opportunities to participate in 
the running of Singapore?
 Arch in front of the Supreme Court (one of the two buildings that make up 
the present-day National Gallery Singapore) commemorating Singapore being 
conferred city status on 22 September 1951. This meant that Singapore was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 65) ---
given additional rights and privileges, like those of cities in Britain. School exhibition to commemorate City Day, 22 September 1951
56
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 66) ---
The Rendel Constitution
The British thus formed a commission10 in July 1953 to review the 
constitution11 of Singapore. It was chaired by Sir George Rendel, a high-
ranking British official. The Rendel Commission’s task was to find out how 
local people could play a more active role in the government. 
The commission submitted its report in 1954, recommending limited self-
government for Singapore. This meant the people would be able to elect
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 66) ---
locals to control certain areas of the government. As a result of the report, 
the Rendel Constitution was introduced in 1955. There would now be a 
Council of Ministers headed by the Governor, and comprising the Chief 
Minister and five other local ministers, and three British ministers (see 
Figure 7.4 on pages 72–73). The Legislative Council would also be renamed 
the Legislative Assembly.
The six local ministers would be given control over education, health,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 66) ---
housing, and trade and industry. However, the three British ministers 
would control areas deemed more important by the British government: 
law, finance, external affairs, external defence and internal security. 
Although the changes it introduced were limited, the Rendel Constitution 
proved to be an important step in Singapore’s journey towards self-
government. For one thing, the new constitution meant an election was 
to be held in April 1955.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 66) ---
to be held in April 1955.
10 A commission is a group of people appointed to perform a specific task, for example, to conduct an investigation and write  
a report. 
11 A constitution is a set of laws that a government must follow. The Constitution of Singapore determines the limits within which 
the Singapore government has to work. The Rendel Commission meeting at Victoria 
Memorial Hall (part of present-day Victoria  
Theatre and Concert Hall), 1953. George Rendel
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 66) ---
Theatre and Concert Hall), 1953. George Rendel  
is standing fifth from the right.
57
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 67) ---
1955 Election
While the election in 1948 and the subsequent one in 1951 had met with 
lukewarm response from the local population, the 1955 election aroused 
far greater interest and generated much political activity. 
The people were encouraged by the greater degree of self-government 
promised in the Rendel Constitution. In addition, eligible voters were 
automatically registered instead of having to register themselves, making
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 67) ---
it easier to vote. Those eager to press for change held discussions, and 
more political parties emerged as a result. 
Two political parties that gained prominence in the mid-1950s were the 
Labour Front (LF) and the People’s Action Party (PAP).
The parties campaigned hard to raise political awareness among the locals 
and to win their support. They visited houses, distributed newspapers and 
pamphlets, held rallies, and gave speeches to crowds hungry for change.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 67) ---
The campaigns focused on anti-colonialism, and many voters found 
themselves drawn to the anti-colonial attacks delivered by parties like the 
LF and the PAP. Election van, with a sign that reads “The vote is 
secret”, being driven around Singapore to inform 
people of the 1955 election
The LF was led by David Marshall, and its key members included 
Lim Y ew Hock and Francis Thomas. It was a multiracial party 
and comprised mostly low-income and English-educated 
members of trade unions.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 67) ---
members of trade unions. 
The LF supported immediate independence for Singapore. The  
party prioritised the improvement of workers’ rights and working 
conditions. It also fought to extend Singapore citizenship to 
China-born immigrants, which led many Chinese-speaking 
people to support the party.LABOUR FRONT (LF)
Founded in 
July 1954
 David Marshall addressing a crowd at Empress Place, 1955
The PAP was co-founded by Lee Kuan Y ew, Dr Goh Keng Swee,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 67) ---
Dr Toh Chin Chye, S. Rajaratnam and Kenneth Michael Byrne.  
Among its ranks were mainly English-educated lawyers, 
journalists and trade unionists. 
Like the LF, the PAP was a multiracial party that opposed British 
rule and wanted immediate independence for Singapore. It 
sought to win the support of workers, trade unions and students 
in Chinese-medium schools. PEOPLE’S ACTION PARTY (PAP)
Founded in 
November 1954
 Lee Kuan Yew campaigning at Farrer Park, 1955
58
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 67) ---
Lee Kuan Yew campaigning at Farrer Park, 1955
58
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 68) ---
The LF and the PAP convinced many that they could bring an end to British 
rule and gained the support of the people, unlike the SPP (see page 52). 
David Marshall, the leader of the LF, was a lawyer by profession and he 
spoke about the need for self-rule. He was deeply critical of the SPP’s 
inability to push effectively for self-government. The LF and the PAP also 
attracted much support among voters by promising to improve workers’ 
welfare if they were elected.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 68) ---
welfare if they were elected.
Read Source 6 to find out how the 1955 election changed the political 
mood in Singapore.
The 1955 election was a lively political contest, with a level of excitement 
not seen before. A total of 79 candidates contested the 25 elected seats 
in the Legislative Assembly. That was about five times the number of 
candidates in 1948. About 160,000 people (slightly above 50 per cent of 
those eligible) turned up to vote.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 68) ---
those eligible) turned up to vote. 
On the night of 2 April 1955, over 5,000 people gathered at Empress Place 
to await the election results. When they were announced, the crowd 
roared in jubilation. The SPP had lost and the LF emerged as the biggest 
winner, clinching 10 out of the 25 seats. 
The results shocked the colonial authorities as they had expected the SPP 
to win. It was clearer than ever that the people wished to be freed from 
British rule.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 68) ---
British rule.
I got the crowds with me. I had a lot of fun. I created a lot of excitement. I was happy with having achieved what I set out 
to do. And that’s to awaken us to the fact, “Hey, we are human beings! Hey, we have got the right to vote! Hey, we have 
got a right to elect our own [leaders]. We’ve got a right to, a voice in how we are to live.” Now, that is something you don’t
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 68) ---
understand today. But that was [a] very, very [important change] at that time. You know, it’s like a four-legged animal 
suddenly finding himself standing straight and looking upwards instead of looking to the ground. It really was a [major] 
change … “Hey, we are standing on two legs.”
– David Marshall reflecting on the 1955 election, adapted from a 1984 oral interviewSOURCE 6
1. According to David Marshall, why was the 1955 election so important for the people in Singapore?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 68) ---
Article in The Straits Times, 4 April 1955, showing 
David Marshall thanking the voters after the LF’s 
victory in the Legislative Assembly election
 Figure 7.3: Results of the 1955 election1955 Election Results
Party No. of Seats
Labour Front 10
Singapore Progressive Party 4
Alliance Party 3
People’s Action Party 3
Democratic Party 2
Independents 3
59
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 69) ---
How Did Singapore Achieve 
Internal Self-Government? 
Having won the most seats, the LF formed a coalition12 to head the 
government. David Marshall became Singapore’s first Chief Minister and 
worked under the Governor. 
The Governor and his British officials saw Marshall as a leader only in name 
and did not offer him full support. They were not eager to cooperate with 
the LF government, which was anchored by a party committed to ending 
colonial rule.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 69) ---
colonial rule.
One example of the lack of British support for Marshall was the delay in 
giving him a proper office to work in. Read Source 7 to learn how Marshall 
responded to the way he was treated.
Hock Lee Bus Riots
A month after the LF won the 1955 election, the Hock Lee Bus Strike broke 
out. While industrial strikes and disputes were not uncommon then, the 
Hock Lee Bus Strike was one that turned violent.
The incident presented a major challenge to the LF government. In the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 69) ---
eyes of the British, it also tested the new government’s ability to deal 
effectively with what were seen to be communist influences. Read the 
following illustrated story to find out what happened.Who was  
DAVID MARSHALL?
?
David Marshall (1908–1995) was 
born in Singapore into a Jewish family 
from Baghdad (in present-day Iraq). 
During World War II, he joined local 
volunteer forces to fight against the 
Japanese, but was captured and sent to 
various prison camps overseas.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 69) ---
various prison camps overseas.
After his return to Singapore in 1946, 
Marshall enjoyed a successful career 
as a lawyer. He was also actively 
involved in Singapore’s political scene. 
Originally a member of the SPP , he 
later resigned and joined the Singapore 
Socialist Party – one of the two parties 
that later came together to form the 
LF. In 1955, Marshall resigned from 
his legal career and won a seat in 
the Legislative Assembly election 
as a representative of the Cairnhill
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 69) ---
as a representative of the Cairnhill 
constituency. As leader of the LF, 
he also assumed the role of Chief 
Minister. Following the failure of the 
First Merdeka Talks, he resigned on  
7 June 1956. 
Marshall continued to be active in 
politics and founded the Workers’ 
Party in 1957. From 1978, he served 
as Singapore’s Ambassador to various 
countries such as France, Spain, 
Portugal and Switzerland, before 
finally retiring in 1993.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 69) ---
finally retiring in 1993.
I blasted out. I said, “You won’t give me an office, right? Will you give me a 
chair and a table under the old apple tree? You won’t give me that? I’ll supply 
them. You just supply me with a telephone.”
… Bill Goode [Acting Governor of Singapore] came up to me [and] said, “Do 
nothing drastic. I promise you an office by Monday morning.”
– David Marshall recounting his early days as  
Chief Minister, adapted from a 1984 oral interviewSOURCE 7
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 69) ---
12 A coalition is an alliance between two or more political parties. It occurs when no party has a majority of the seats and an 
effective government can only be formed through an alliance.1. What does this incident suggest about how the British saw Marshall’s role 
as the first Chief Minister of Singapore?
60
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 70) ---
The HOCK LEE BUS RIOTS The HOCK LEE BUS RIOTS 
The Hock Lee Amalgamated Bus Company was a small company 
in Singapore. Some of its workers belonged to the Singapore 
Bus Workers’ Union (SBWU) while some joined the Hock Lee Bus 
Employees’ Union.
The bus company responded by 
dismissing 229 workers. The dismissed 
workers went on a hunger strike and 
sat in front of the gates of the bus 
depot, preventing buses from leaving.In late April 1955, workers from the SBWU, led by
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 70) ---
Fong Swee Suan, went on strike over what they felt 
was unfair treatment. For instance, they were not 
granted leave to attend union meetings. They also felt 
that workers from the Hock Lee Bus Employees’ Union 
were given better treatment.
The police were called in to intervene, 
but to no avail. On 27 April, the strikers 
continued to block the gate and began 
to hurl stones at the police.To clear the crowd, the police used batons. 
About 15 people were injured as a result.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 70) ---
About 15 people were injured as a result.
Over the next few days, more than 10,000 students from Chinese-medium 
schools gathered at the depot to support the striking workers. They 
brought food for the workers and entertained them with song and dance.
Chief Minister David Marshall tried to settle the dispute between the bus 
company and the SBWU. But the two parties could not reach an agreement.
61
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 71) ---
In the meantime, the strike grew. Employees 
of other bus companies joined in to protest 
against the treatment of their fellow workers.
On 12 May, tensions reached a climax. The 
police attempted to disperse the crowd 
with water hoses. Enraged by the actions 
of the police, the crowd fought back by 
throwing bricks, stones and bottles.
By the next morning, four people had been 
killed and 31 injured. Among the dead were 
a police detective and a 16-year-old student.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 71) ---
a police detective and a 16-year-old student.
On 14 May 1955, the Hock Lee Bus Riots ended after 
the government helped to negotiate an agreement 
between the unions and the Hock Lee Bus Company. 
The dismissed workers got their jobs back.However, many trade union members 
remained suspicious of the government and 
continued to organise rallies and protests.
62
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 72) ---
The British were not impressed with Marshall’s handling of the Hock Lee 
Bus Riots. He had refused to call in British troops to handle the riots as he 
did not want to appear to be siding with the British. To the British, the LF 
government seemed weak due to Marshall’s reluctance to take stronger 
action against those involved in the riots and his willingness to negotiate 
instead. This was to have an impact on the First Merdeka Talks held in 1956.
The First Merdeka Talks (1956)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 72) ---
The First Merdeka Talks (1956)
In April 1956, David Marshall led a mission to London to press for  
Singapore’s self-government. These negotiations were known as the  
Merdeka (Freedom) Talks.
In London, Marshall demanded full internal self-government for Singapore 
by 1957. He was determined to have greater local control over defence and 
external affairs. He had vowed to resign as Chief Minister if the negotiations 
did not succeed.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 72) ---
did not succeed.
The talks did not go well. After the Hock Lee Bus Riots, the British doubted 
the LF government’s ability to maintain law and order and to deal with the 
communist threat. The British wanted a strong and stable government in 
Singapore to protect British economic and defence interests, and to keep 
it from becoming communist.
As a result, Marshall and his delegation returned to Singapore empty-
handed. True to his promise, he stepped down as Chief Minister, and Lim
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 72) ---
Yew Hock took over. Singapore’s hopes of independence had suffered a 
setback.Who was  
LIM YEW HOCK?
?
Lim Y ew Hock (1914–1984) was 
born in Singapore into a Chinese 
family from Malaya. He started out 
as a clerk and later became involved 
in union activities. His easy-going 
personality, sense of humour and 
ability to connect with people from 
all walks of life won him the support 
of the masses. In 1947, he became 
Secretary-General of the Singapore 
Clerical and Administrative Workers’
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 72) ---
Clerical and Administrative Workers’ 
Union and later its President. In 1948, 
he represented trade unions as a 
non-official member of the Legislative 
Council.
Though initially reluctant to take up 
prominent leadership positions, Lim 
became Singapore’s second Chief 
Minister in the LF government in 1956 
after David Marshall’s resignation. In 
the 1959 election, he won a seat as a 
representative of the Singapore People’s 
Alliance (SPA). 
Lim did not contest the 1963 election,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 72) ---
Lim did not contest the 1963 election, 
but was appointed Malaysia’s High 
Commissioner to Australia the 
following year. He later 
became a Malaysian 
citizen and worked for 
the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs in Malaysia 
until his retirement  
in 1968.
 Negotiations between British colonial authorities and the Singapore all-party delegation led by  
David Marshall (sixth from right) during the First Merdeka Talks in London, 1956
63
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 72) ---
63
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 73) ---
LEARN A SKILL: STUDYING PAINTINGS
Artwork can serve as historical sources. By studying a piece of art, you can find out more about the time 
and place in which it was produced. It can give you an idea of:
• what things looked like;
• what people did and how they did them; and
• how people saw themselves or were seen by others. 
When studying an artwork, you need to know its context. This means learning about the artist and the period
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 73) ---
in which the artwork was produced. Knowing the context allows you to better understand the messages 
embedded within the artwork. It also directs you to think about why the artwork was produced.
Look at the painting below. Titled On Strike, it was completed in 1955 by artist Tan Tee Chie. Tan was born 
in China in 1928 and studied at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts in Singapore, from which he graduated
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 73) ---
in 1951. He is known for his series of works depicting the plight and hardships faced by people in post-war 
Singapore.
In Chapter 4, you learnt how to examine images using the process of See-Think-Wonder:
LEARN ON THE GO
Hone your skills in 
analysing historical 
paintings @  
go.gov.sg/lshc701.
See:  
What do you see?Think:  
What do you  
think is going on?Wonder:  
What does it  
make you wonder?1 2 3Step Step Step
 Tan Tee Chie  
On Strike  
1955  
Oil on canvas, 66 x 86.5 cm
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 73) ---
On Strike  
1955  
Oil on canvas, 66 x 86.5 cm  
Collection of National Gallery Singapore
64
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 74) ---
Examine Tan Tee Chie’s painting on the previous page using these steps. To deepen your understanding of 
the artwork and the period in which it was produced, you should add a fourth step: What is the purpose of 
the artwork? 
What do you see?What do you think  
is going on?What does it make  
you wonder?
What details do you see in the painting? What do you think might be going on 
in the painting? (You may tap your 
contextual knowledge about this topic.)What additional questions or thoughts
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 74) ---
do you have regarding this painting?
I see … I think … I wonder …
What is the purpose of the artwork?
Based on what you know about the historical context (e.g., period and circumstances) in which the painting was produced, 
what do you think might have influenced the artist to paint this?
What message(s) do you think the artist was trying to convey through the painting?
Who do you think the target audience was?
What emotions do you think the artist was trying to evoke in the audience?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 74) ---
What response do you think the artist hoped to get from the audience?1
42 3
65
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 75) ---
Chinese Middle School Student Riots
Lim Yew Hock wanted to succeed where David Marshall had failed. He 
understood that the British were concerned about the communist threat 
in Singapore. Thus, his government needed to show its ability to control 
the communists, which would help convince the British that Singapore was 
ready to take greater charge of its own affairs. This can be seen in the way 
he handled the Chinese Middle School Student Riots in 1956.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 75) ---
CHINESE MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENT RIOTSCHINESE MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENT RIOTS
In September 1956, Lim Yew Hock’s 
government banned the Singapore Chinese 
Middle School Students’ Union (SCMSSU) 
because of its supposed communist activities.In response, around 5,000 students took over 
their schools and demanded the re-registration 
of the SCMSSU. After stern warnings from the 
government, the students’ protests died down.
Two weeks later, the government ordered the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 75) ---
Two weeks later, the government ordered the 
expulsion of 142 students from several schools, such 
as Chung Cheng High School and The Chinese High 
School, on suspicion of anti-government activities. 
Students camped at both schools in protest.On 24 October, 
Lim Yew Hock 
made a radio 
broadcast 
demanding that 
students leave the 
school premises 
by 8 o’clock the 
following evening.
This time, with the support of the unions, the 
students were more defiant and willing to
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 75) ---
students were more defiant and willing to 
fight to the bitter end. Large crowds gathered 
outside the schools.The demonstrations turned 
violent when a mob outside 
Chung Cheng High School 
confronted the police. 
The ensuing riots spread 
across the island and 
continued for three days. 
Troops from Malaya were 
called in to restore order.
66
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 76) ---
By the time order was restored on 28 October, 13 people had died and 
more than 120 had been injured. Lim Chin Siong, Fong Swee Suan and other 
union leaders were swiftly detained by the police in the aftermath of the 
unrest.
On the whole, the British were pleased with Lim Yew Hock’s decisive 
handling of the riots. This strengthened his position when he travelled 
to London in 1957 to renew discussions about self-government. However,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 76) ---
Lim’s tough actions made his LF government appear to be “running dogs”13 
of the British in the eyes of some locals.Who was  
LIM CHIN SIONG?
?Who was  
FONG SWEE SUAN?
?
Lim Chin Siong (1933–1996) was born in Singapore. As 
a student at The Chinese High School, he was an active 
member of the Singapore Students’ Anti-British League 
(SSABL), set up by the MCP . After leading an examination 
boycott in 1951, he was expelled.
Active in trade union activities, Lim was appointed Secretary
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 76) ---
of the Singapore Bus Workers’ Union (SBWU) in 1954 and 
later assumed leadership of the Singapore Factory and Shop 
Workers’ Union (SFSWU).
Lim joined the PAP in 1954 and was elected to the Legislative 
Assembly in 1955. However, he was arrested the following 
year for anti-British activities and detained until 1959. 
In 1961, Lim was expelled from the PAP for 
opposing the proposed merger with Malaya. 
He and other expelled party members went 
on to form the Barisan Sosialis (Socialist
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 76) ---
on to form the Barisan Sosialis (Socialist 
Front) party. 
In 1963, Lim was arrested during Operation 
Coldstore (see Chapter 8, page 100). Upon his 
release in 1969, he moved to London, 
only returning to Singapore in 1979.Born in Johor, Malaya, Fong Swee Suan (1931–2017) moved 
to Singapore in 1950 to attend The Chinese High School, 
where he was classmates with Lim Chin Siong. Like Lim, he 
was expelled for boycotting an examination in 1951. Fong
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 76) ---
then became a bus ticket seller and member of the SBWU, 
actively promoting workers’ rights. In 1953, he was elected its 
Secretary-General. 
In 1954, Fong joined the PAP , but his involvement in anti-
colonial activities led to his arrest in 1955 and 1956. After his 
release in 1959, he served under the PAP government as the 
Political Secretary in the Ministry of Labour and Law. 
Fong’s opposition to the proposed merger with Malaya led 
to his expulsion from the PAP in 1961, after
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 76) ---
to his expulsion from the PAP in 1961, after 
which he helped to form the Barisan 
Sosialis. In 1963, he was arrested during 
Operation Coldstore and detained in 
Malaysia until 1967. Banned from  
re-entering Singapore, he lived in 
Malaysia until 1990, when the ban  
was lifted.
13 “Running dogs” is a negative term used to refer to followers who are overly eager to serve or please their masters. Students and police at Chung Cheng High School 
during the Chinese Middle School Student Riots,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 76) ---
during the Chinese Middle School Student Riots, 
1956
67
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 77) ---
Major Riots in SingaporeMajor Riots in Singapore
Anti-National Service Riots (1954)
Maria Hertogh Riots (1950)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 78) ---
During the 1950sDuring the 1950s
Chinese Middle School Student Riots (1956)
 Hock Lee Bus Riots (1955)
LEARN ON THE GO
Learn more about 
the riots in 1950s 
Singapore @  
go.gov.sg/lshc702 .
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 79) ---
LEARN ON THE GO
Explore the concept 
of historical 
significance further @  
go.gov.sg/lshc703.
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE
In the study of past events or developments, historians make judgements 
about their significance. This historical significance is not a fixed 
property. It varies depending on who makes these judgements and the 
criteria they use.  
Here are two of the criteria that historians may apply to assess whether 
something is historically significant:
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 79) ---
something is historically significant:
1. It resulted in change that had or still has far-reaching consequences 
for society.
2. It is remembered; the event or development was or remains 
memorable for a group of people.
As you read on, think about how significant the 1959 election was.
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
The Second Merdeka Talks (1957)
In 1957, Lim Yew Hock led another delegation to London 
to renegotiate for full internal self-government. Like David
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 79) ---
Marshall, he wanted to gain control over all internal matters 
of government, including internal security. On this last 
matter, however, Lim showed a willingness to compromise. 
He recognised that the British reluctance to surrender full 
control of internal security was due to their concerns about 
the communist threat. The delegation also agreed to leave 
external affairs and external defence in the hands of the 
British. 
In this way, the second round of the Merdeka Talks
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 79) ---
succeeded in securing full internal self-government 
for Singapore. A concluding round of talks was held in 
London in 1958 to finalise the details of the agreement. A 
new constitution was drawn up in the same year, with the 
British Parliament passing a State of Singapore Act that 
converted the colony into a state with control over all 
domestic issues except for internal security.14
Under the new constitution, Singapore would be known 
as the State of Singapore. A Head of State, or Yang di-
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 79) ---
Pertuan Negara, would replace the British Governor. To 
bring this new constitution into force, an election was to 
be held in 1959.
 Lim Yew Hock on his return from the Second Merdeka Talks in London, 1957
14 After the 1959 election, an Internal Security Council (ISC) was set up to deal with Singapore’s internal security matters. The ISC 
comprised representatives from Britain and Malaya, as well as local members.
70
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 80) ---
1959 Election
For the election, Singapore was divided into 51 constituencies.15 Voters 
in each constituency would elect a representative. For the first time, 
the people could elect representatives to all the seats in the Legislative 
Assembly. 
A total of 13 political parties took part and 194 candidates stood for 
election. Since the elected government would have almost full internal 
powers to carry out its programmes, the stakes were high.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 80) ---
The parties worked hard to convince people that they were capable of 
leading a self-governing Singapore. They used radio broadcasts, newspapers 
and pamphlets to spread their ideas. Vehicles with loudspeakers 
broadcasting party slogans were a common sight. Candidates also held 
election rallies, which were attended by large crowds. 
Compared to the 1955 election, people showed an even greater interest 
as it was an opportunity for them to decide who was most suited to the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 80) ---
task of governing Singapore. This increased interest was partly due to the 
Citizenship Ordinance of 1957, which enabled some 320,000 residents to 
become Singapore citizens and thus gave them the right to vote. This 
included a large proportion of the 220,000 foreign-born Chinese residents.
Compulsory voting was also introduced to ensure that people took 
responsibility in choosing their own government. As a result, about 525,000
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 80) ---
voters turned up, more than three times the number in the 1955 election. 
The election results were announced in the early hours of 31 May. The LF, 
renamed the Singapore People’s Alliance (SPA) in 1958, performed poorly, 
winning only 4 out of the 39 seats they had contested. One reason for 
the SPA’s loss was the unhappiness of many Chinese voters over how  
Lim Yew Hock had handled the Chinese Middle School Student Riots in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 80) ---
1956. On the other hand, the PAP scored a landslide victory, winning 43 out 
of the 51 seats they had contested.
 Headline in The Straits Times, 31 May 1959
15 A constituency is an area in which voters elect a representative to parliament or government.  Voters lining up at one of the polling stations,  
30 May 1959
 Colourful poster encouraging voters to vote, 1959
Singapore citizens aged 21 and above 
have a responsibility to participate 
in their government by voting in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 80) ---
in their government by voting in 
elections to determine who governs 
Singapore. It is important for eligible 
voters to keep themselves well 
informed of the candidates, their 
parties and the ideas they represent 
before deciding who to vote for.DID YOU KNOW?
71
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 81) ---
Progress Towards Internal
First Election, 1948 Limited 
GOVERNOR OF SINGAPORE
Responsible for  
carrying out the laws
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
BRITISH-APPOINTED 
OFFICIALSBRITISH GOVERNMENT 
IN LONDON
Nominated by the 
Governor
9 OFFICIALS
3 selected by the 
Singapore, Chinese, 
and Indian Chambers of 
Commerce
6 elected by the people
4 nominated by the 
Governor
13 NON-OFFICIALS
Responsible for  
making lawsLEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
Governor of 
SingaporeHEAD OF STATE
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
Appointed from 25
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 81) ---
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
Appointed from 25 
elected members of the 
Legislative Assembly
In charge of education, 
health, housing, and 
trade and industry
CHIEF MINISTER 
AND  
5 OTHER LOCAL 
MINISTERS 
Nominated by the 
Governor
In charge of law, 
finance, external affairs, 
external defence and 
internal security
3 BRITISH MINISTERSBRITISH GOVERNMENT 
IN LONDON
 Figure 7.4: Progress towards internal self-government from 1948 to 1959
72
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 82) ---
Full Internal Self-Government, 1959Self-Government, 1948–1959
Self-Government, 1955
Yang di-Pertuan 
Negara
HEAD OF STATE MALAYAN 
GOVERNMENT
Appointed from 51 
elected members of the 
Legislative Assembly 
In charge of culture, 
education, finance, 
health, home affairs, 
housing, law and 
labour, and trade and 
industry
PRIME MINISTER  
AND  
8 OTHER LOCAL 
MINISTERS LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
25 ELECTED NON-OFFICIALS
Nominated by the 
Governor
3 BRITISH OFFICIALS 
AND  
4 NON-OFFICIALS
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 82) ---
3 BRITISH OFFICIALS 
AND  
4 NON-OFFICIALS
In charge of external affairs 
and external defenceBRITISH GOVERNMENT 
IN LONDON
51 ELECTED MEMBERS
Local, British and 
Malayan representatives 
sat on the Internal 
Security Council and 
shared responsibility 
for Singapore’s internal 
security
AREA OF SHARED 
CONTROL:  
INTERNAL SECURITYCABINET LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
73
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 83) ---
On the evening of 3 June 1959, a crowd of 50,000 assembled at the Padang 
in front of City Hall. They greeted the start of Singapore’s internal self-
government with loud cheers. Speaking from a rostrum on the steps of 
City Hall, PAP leader Lee Kuan Yew rallied the people, sounding a message 
of unity and hope: 
Let us work together as a more united people towards 
a brighter and a better future. May the next five years 
be happy, peaceful and prosperous years for all of us!
74
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 83) ---
74
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 84) ---
Who was  
LEE KUAN YEW?
?
Lee Kuan Y ew (1923–2015) was 
born in Singapore into a Peranakan 
Chinese family. Having studied law 
at Cambridge University, he began 
work as a lawyer at the law firm of SPP 
leader John Laycock. His role as an 
election agent for Laycock in 1951 gave 
him his first experience of politics. 
Lee also worked as a legal advisor 
to several trade unions and clan 
associations. In 1954, he represented 
the Chinese middle school students
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 84) ---
the Chinese middle school students 
who appealed against a conviction for 
their role in the Anti-National Service 
Riots. 
One of the founding members of 
the PAP , Lee was elected in 1955 
to represent the Tanjong Pagar 
constituency in the Legislative 
Assembly. He became Singapore’s first 
Prime Minister after the PAP’s victory 
in the 1959 election. He served in this 
capacity till 1990, leading Singapore 
through the years of merger and 
separation with Malaysia, and through
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 84) ---
separation with Malaysia, and through 
the challenges Singapore faced as an 
independent nation. After stepping 
down, he continued to serve in the 
Singapore government as Senior 
Minister (1990–2004) and later, as 
Minister Mentor (2004–2011). 
  PAP’s rally in front of City Hall (left) and the 
crowd at the Padang (bottom), 3 June 1959
75
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 85) ---
1959 proved to be a momentous year. Singapore successfully achieved full 
internal self-government. Yusof bin Ishak was sworn in as the new Head 
of State, the Yang di-Pertuan Negara, on 3 December. At his swearing 
in, Singapore’s State Flag, State Crest and State National Anthem were 
unveiled. The State Flag replaced the Union Jack, which had flown over 
Singapore for most of the past 140 years. The State National Anthem, 
“Majulah Singapura” , replaced Britain’s “God Save the Queen” .
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 85) ---
Yusof bin Ishak being sworn in as the Yang di-Pertuan Negara, 3 December 1959 State Flag  State Crest  Original score of “Majulah 
Singapura” by Zubir SaidWho was  
YUSOF BIN ISHAK?
?
Yusof bin Ishak (1910–1970), 
commonly known as Yusof Ishak, was 
born in Perak, Malaya, but moved 
to Singapore in 1923. He attended 
Victoria Bridge School (present-
day Victoria School) and Raffles 
Institution, where he was the only 
Malay to be admitted into the Queen’s
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 85) ---
Malay to be admitted into the Queen’s 
Scholarship class. After leaving school 
in 1929, he joined Warta Malaya , a 
prominent Malay newspaper. He later 
started the Malay newspaper Utusan 
Melayu  and enjoyed an illustrious 
career in journalism. 
In 1959, Yusof became Chairman 
of the Public Service Commission. 
Later that year, he was appointed Y ang 
di-Pertuan Negara. When Singapore 
gained independence in 
1965, he became the 
first President of the 
Republic of Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 85) ---
first President of the 
Republic of Singapore. 
He was appointed 
for another four-year 
term in 1967 but 
passed away in 
office in 1970. 
76
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 86) ---
The post-war period in Singapore saw locals becoming more discontented 
with British rule as a result of external influences and the hardships they 
had suffered. The increasing anti-colonial sentiments led to strikes and 
riots, but also to greater political participation as the people’s desire for 
self-government grew. 
In 1959, 14 years after the war ended, Singapore attained full internal self-
government, ushering in a new phase in its history. However, it was still not
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 86) ---
an independent nation. In the next chapter, you will find out how the new 
PAP government worked towards that goal. The Yang di-Pertuan Negara, members of the 
Cabinet and the Legislative Assembly at the steps 
of City Hall, 3 December 1959
Conclusion 
77
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 87) ---
Recall the events that occurred on Singapore’s road to full internal self-government. What happened at each 
event? What role did each event play in Singapore’s progress towards self-government? In the corresponding 
boxes below, write down what you know about each event and your reflections about them. An example 
has been done for you.LET’S REVIEW
Full Internal Self-Government (1959)• This was the first time locals had the 
chance to vote for people to represent
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 87) ---
chance to vote for people to represent 
them in the Legislative Council.
• It was a first step towards democracy.
• However, limited participation and the small 
number of seats put up for election meant 
that this event  
was only a small  
step towards  
self-government.1948 Election
 Maria Hertogh Riots (1950)
Second Merdeka Talks (1957)
 1959 Election
Full Internal Self-Government (1959)
End of World War II (1945)
78
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 88) ---
Anti-National Service Riots (1954)
 1955 Election
Hock Lee Bus Riots (1955)
 Chinese Middle School Student Riots (1956)
79
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 89) ---
Although Singapore did not achieve full independence in 1959, that year has long been regarded by many 
in Singapore as a significant one. Scenes of large crowds at the Padang celebrating the formation of the PAP 
government, victorious at the 1959 election, remain vividly etched in the minds of many who lived through 
the period. Fifty years later, an article in The Straits Times commemorating the 1959 election indicated that
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 89) ---
the election and its outcome marked the time a “new Singapore came into being”. You looked at the concept 
of historical significance earlier in this chapter (see page 70). Why might the 1959 election be considered a 
significant event in Singapore’s history? Study the sources and answer the questions that follow. In what ways could the 1959 election be considered significant?CASE INVESTIGATION
SOURCE A
Electoral Progress in Singapore, 1948–1959
1948 1955 1959
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 89) ---
1948 1955 1959
Total Number of Seats in the Legislative Council/Assembly 22 32 51
Number of Elected Seats 6 25 51
Number of Contesting Parties 1 6 13
Number of Candidates 15 79 194
Number of Registered Voters 22,395 300,292 587,797
% of Eligible Voters Who Voted 62 53 89
 Table showing details of the 1948, 1955 and 1959 elections 
The 1959 election campaign … [was] unlike the present type of campaigning. Basically, the candidates usually [went] to
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 89) ---
the homes of the voters and they also [held] mass rallies not only during the night but also during the day. There [were] 
no restrictions on the [sites] for usage as mass rallies … You would be surprised to know that mass rallies were also held 
at back lanes of homes and nooks and corners of small places where [candidates expected] the voters to go and hear 
them.
– Adapted from a 2002 oral interview with Chan Pitt Thong, an officer who worked at the Elections Department in 1959SOURCE B
80
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 89) ---
80
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 90) ---
SOURCE C
SOURCE D PAP election rally at Hong Lim Park, 1 April 1959
 Photograph depicting a scene from Polling Day, 30 May 1959
81
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 91) ---
Everybody went forward to vote quite willingly without much grumbling. [T]he fear of [losing their] citizenship was in 
the mind of [some people]. My mother for example, … thought that she must vote or she would lose her citizenship … I 
thought she was representative of the other [people]. They got citizenship – the carpenters, construction workers and all 
these people. They went to vote and these were the people who really supported us.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 91) ---
[Some of the more well-to-do people had doubts about] us. I remember in my street, [there] was a father and son team. 
The father was against the PAP, the son used to quarrel with him. That was the situation. The significance was that 
everybody exercised his [right to] vote … and they thought it was the right thing to do.
– Adapted from a 1980 oral interview with Fong Sip Chee, a PAP member who helped out during the 1959 election campaignSOURCE E
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 91) ---
[The 1959 election] marked the close of a successful chapter in the anti-colonial struggle [where Singapore gained full] 
internal self-government. [After the election, the next step for Singapore was to] fight to attain complete independence 
through merger with Malaya. It is significant that it was through [the 1959 election] that the PAP first came into power. 
The PAP used this mandate to build up its strength and image and laid the foundation for victories in three subsequent
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 91) ---
general elections in 1963, 1968 and 1972. Hence, the 1959 election decisively influenced subsequent events.
– Adapted from an account of the 1959 election by Dr Ong Chit Chung, a Singaporean historian, published in 1975SOURCE F
 People in Singapore waiting to cast their votes, 30 May 1959
82
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 92) ---
1. Study Source A. Identify four ways in which the 1959 election was on a larger scale compared to 
previous elections.
2. Read Source B. What does it tell you about how political parties reached out to the people in 1959?
3. Study Sources C and D. What can you conclude from these sources about how people responded to the 
1959 election?
4. Read Source E. What reason(s) does it give to explain the increase in the number of people who voted 
in the 1959 election?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 92) ---
in the 1959 election?
5. Read Source F. What are the two main reasons it gives for describing the 1959 election as “significant”?
Having studied the sources, in what ways do you think the 1959 election could be considered significant? 
Complete the table below based on the sources and what you have read in the chapter. Provide a short 
explanation for each criterion met. Some examples have been done for you.INVESTIGATE!
REPORT!
In What Ways Could the 1959 Election Be Considered Significant?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 92) ---
Criterion Explanation
Resulted in change: what long-lasting or far-
reaching change did the 1959 election bring to 
Singapore? The 1959 election marked Singapore’s successful move to full 
internal self-government (Source F).
Remembered: what made the 1959 election 
memorable to the people who experienced or 
lived through it? The election rallies in the 1959 election were unusual and reached 
out to many people (Sources B and C). 
83
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 92) ---
out to many people (Sources B and C). 
83
HOW DID THE PEOPLE IN SINGAPORE RESPOND TO BRITISH RULE AFTER WORLD WAR II?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 94) ---
1 A federation is a group of states led by a central government but with each state retaining a degree of control over their own 
internal affairs.
2 A sovereign nation refers to a nation that is not subject to the rule or control of another nation.
 Headline in The Straits Times, 16 September 1963, proclaiming the merger of Singapore with Malaya, Sabah 
and Sarawak
85
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?The attainment of full internal self-government in 1959 marked a new
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 94) ---
chapter in Singapore’s history. To the new PAP government, independence 
from the British was the next step. To achieve this, it successfully pursued 
a merger of Singapore with Malaya, Sabah and Sarawak, forming the 
Federation1 of Malaysia. This merger, however, was short-lived. Less than 
two years later, Singapore separated from Malaysia and found itself facing 
an uncertain future alone. 
In this chapter, you will learn why Singapore sought to merge with Malaya
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 94) ---
and how it did so. You will also learn why the merger did not work out and 
how that resulted in Singapore’s separation from Malaysia to become an 
independent and sovereign2 nation.CHAPTER  
8
How Did Singapore Become  
an Independent Nation?
You will learn:
• Why Singapore wanted to 
merge with Malaya in 1963
• Why there was opposition to 
the merger
• How Singapore successfully 
pursued merger with Malaya
• What led to Singapore’s 
separation from Malaysia in 
1965 Chapter at a Glance
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 95) ---
Beyond Singapore In Singapore Lee Kuan Yew being carried 
by supporters after winning 
the 1959 election Independent candidate Ong Eng Guan 
(seen with garlands of flowers), winner 
of the 1961 Hong Lim by-election
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew giving one of 
his speeches advocating merger at Radio 
Singapore, 1961Malaya gains 
independence 
from Britain.The Cobbold Commission finds 
that two-thirds of the people 
in North Borneo and Sarawak
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 95) ---
in North Borneo and Sarawak 
are in favour of the merger.Tunku Abdul Rahman announces 
proposals for a merger of Malaya, 
Singapore, North Borneo, Brunei 
and Sarawak.
The PAP wins the 
1959 election.The Hong Lim by-election is 
held.
The Malaysia Exhibition 
is held as part of 
Malaysia Week.
A referendum is held on 
the proposed merger. Prime Minister Lee Kuan 
Yew rallies the people 
in Singapore to vote for 
merger in a series of radio 
talks known as The Battle
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 95) ---
talks known as The Battle 
for Merger.The Barisan Sosialis 
(Socialist Front) is 
established and opposes 
the proposed merger. Malayan Prime Minister Tunku Abdul 
Rahman proclaiming independence 
for Malaya, 31 August 1957 Tunku Abdul Rahman delivering a speech in 
Singapore that sets in motion the plans for 
the formation of Malaysia, 27 May 1961 Members of the Cobbold Commission, 
with Lord Cameron Cobbold seated in 
the middle, 1962
Timeline
1959 1957 1962 1961
86
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 95) ---
the middle, 1962
Timeline
1959 1957 1962 1961
86
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 96) ---
Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall, 
16 September 1963 Roadblock set up by police 
and soldiers in the North 
Bridge Road area following 
the outbreak of riots three 
days earlier, 24 July 1964 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew 
announcing the separation,  
9 August 1965
Konfrontasi 
(Confrontation) 
begins when 
Indonesia opposes 
the formation of the 
Federation of Malaysia.The PAP takes part in 
the 1964 federal election 
but wins only one seat.
Operation Coldstore 
is launched by the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 96) ---
Operation Coldstore 
is launched by the 
Internal Security 
Council.The Malaysian 
Solidarity Convention 
is formed to push for 
a “Malaysian Malaysia” .
Clashes on Prophet 
Muhammad’s birthday 
spark riots across 
Singapore.Singapore merges 
with Malaya, Sabah 
and Sarawak to form 
the Federation of 
Malaysia. Singapore attains 
independence.
The PAP emerges victorious 
in the 1963 election. PAP’s Devan Nair being carried 
by supporters after winning a 
seat in the Bangsar constituency
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 96) ---
seat in the Bangsar constituency 
in the 1964 federal election
1965 1964 1963
87
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 97) ---
Why Did the PAP Government 
Pursue a Merger with Malaya?
 Map 8.1: Map highlighting (in orange) the territories the British had envisioned forming a new federation
MALAYA
SarawakBruneiNorth Borneo
SingaporeNThe PAP’s 1959 election promise included achieving independence for 
Singapore through merger with Malaya. The idea of a merger was not new 
as many people in Singapore had advocated a merger with Malaya since 
1948. Singapore’s fate was thought to be inseparable from that of Malaya.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 97) ---
Why was this so?
Political Independence
Merger with Malaya was deemed necessary for Singapore to achieve 
political independence as it was the only way the British would let go of 
control over Singapore. During the Cold War, Britain feared that Southeast 
Asia would fall under communist control, especially given influences from 
communist China and rising communist movements in nearby Indonesia 
and Vietnam. To safeguard Singapore and the Borneo territories (North
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 97) ---
Borneo and Sarawak) from the spread of communism, the British sought 
to provide greater political stability through the formation of a new 
federation comprising Malaya, Singapore, North Borneo (later known as 
Sabah), Sarawak and Brunei. See Map 8.1 below.
88
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 98) ---
Economic Survival
Another reason for the PAP to pursue merger was the belief that Singapore 
could not survive economically in the long term without a merger. Read 
Source 1 to find out more.
Everyone knows the reasons why the Federation [of Malaya] is important to Singapore. It is the hinterland which  
produces the rubber and tin that keep our shop-window economy going. It is the base that made Singapore the capital 
city.* Without this economic base Singapore would not survive.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 98) ---
Without merger, without a reunification of our two governments and an integration of our two economies, our economic 
position will slowly and steadily get worse.
– Adapted from one of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew’s The Battle for Merger radio talks delivered in 1961
* “Capital city” in this context refers to an important city.SOURCE 1
1. According to Source 1, what were the reasons given by Prime Minister Lee for Malaya’s economic importance to 
Singapore?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 98) ---
Singapore?
 View of the Causeway connecting Singapore (top) 
to Malaya (bottom), 1952
89
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 99) ---
3 A tariff is a tax imposed by a government on goods entering or leaving the country. This increases the price of such goods.
4 A common market is an agreement between territories allowing goods produced in one territory to enter another territory 
without tariffs or restrictions. Singapore did not appear to have a promising economic future if left on 
its own. It lacked natural resources and had a rapidly growing population in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 99) ---
need of jobs. It was also facing a declining entrepôt trade. As its neighbours 
became independent, they wanted to direct their exports through their 
own ports, reducing Singapore’s importance as a regional trading port. 
Moreover, the Malayan government had introduced tariffs3 in the 1950s 
on goods traded with Singapore. The tariffs made goods entering Malaya 
from Singapore more expensive and thus less desirable to customers in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 99) ---
Malaya (see an example in Figure 8.1 below). This reduced the amount of 
trade between Malaya and Singapore. 
Thus, a merger seemed necessary for Singapore’s economic survival. If a 
common market4 could be established through the merger, the Malayan 
hinterland would create a larger demand for Singapore’s manufactured 
goods. Trade would increase and more jobs could be created for the people. Figure 8.1: An example of how tariffs work
A tariff of 25% ($2.50) is added
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 99) ---
A tariff of 25% ($2.50) is added 
by the Malayan government.
 Cartoon from The Straits Times showing the impact  
of tariffs on trade between Singapore and Malaya,  
24 September 1960. In September 1960, the 
Singapore government imposed a tariff on 
imported soap. As a result, prices of Malayan-made 
and other imported soap became more expensive. 
Subsequently, the Malayan government imposed 
a tariff that made soap from Singapore more 
expensive in Malaya.Made in Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 99) ---
expensive in Malaya.Made in Singapore 
$12.50Made in Singapore 
$10Made in Malaya 
$10
90
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 100) ---
Who was  
TUNKU ABDUL RAHMAN?
?
Tunku Abdul Rahman (1903–1990) 
was born in Kedah, Malaya, the 
seventh son of the Sultan of Kedah. He 
studied Law and History at Cambridge 
University, graduating in 1925. After 
his return, he joined the Kedah Civil 
Service and later became a Deputy 
Public Prosecutor in 1949. 
In 1951, the Tunku became President 
of the United Malays National 
Organisation (UMNO) and effected 
the alliance of UMNO with the 
Malayan Chinese Association (MCA)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 100) ---
Malayan Chinese Association (MCA) 
and the Malayan Indian Congress 
(MIC). 
In 1955, Tunku Abdul Rahman 
became Chief Minister of the 
Federation of Malaya after his party 
won an overwhelming majority in the 
1955 election. As Chief Minister, he 
supervised the independence process 
that led to Malaya’s independence on 
31 August 1957. He was Malaya’s first 
Prime Minister from 1957 to 1970. What Was Malaya’s Response to 
a Possible Merger?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 100) ---
a Possible Merger?
There was initial hesitation in Malaya towards the merger. However, it 
eventually turned around and accepted the possibility of a merger despite 
the doubts. 
Malaya’s Initial Response
Across the Causeway, the Malayan Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, 
initially thought a merger with Singapore spelt trouble. He saw stark 
differences in outlook between the people in Singapore and Malaya. He 
was concerned that the predominantly Chinese population in Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 100) ---
might be reluctant to accept a Malay Sultan as their Head of State, use 
Malay as the national language or accept Islam as the state religion. 
Furthermore, he was concerned about changes to the racial makeup in 
a new federation. A merger with Singapore alone meant the combined 
Chinese population would outnumber the Malays (see Figure 8.2 below). 
The Tunku also suspected that many Chinese in Singapore had sympathies  
for the communists, given that many of them had led and supported the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 100) ---
strikes of the 1950s. He was worried that such attitudes would spread to 
the rest of the new federation. 
However, by the middle of 1961, he began to support the idea of a merger. Figure 8.2: Chart showing the estimated numbers of Malay and Chinese in 1960
Federation of Malaya Federation of Malaya if 
merged with SingaporeFederation of Malaya if 
merged with Singapore, 
North Borneo and Sarawak02
134Population (million)ChineseMalay3.1m
2.3m3.4m3.6m4.0m
3.7m
91
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 100) ---
2.3m3.4m3.6m4.0m
3.7m
91
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 101) ---
5 A by-election is an election held to fill a seat that becomes empty between general elections. This could occur when the 
representative occupying the seat is expelled from the party, resigns or passes away.
 Ong Eng Guan attending a press conference, 1960
 Independent candidate Ong Eng Guan (seen with 
garlands of flowers), winner of the 1961 Hong Lim 
by-electionFear of an Independent, Communist-Influenced 
Singapore 
As you learnt in Chapter 7 (see footnote on page 70), Malaya had a
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 101) ---
representative on Singapore’s Internal Security Council. The Tunku was 
concerned that if Singapore became an independent state, separate from 
the Federation, Malaya would no longer have a representative on the 
Internal Security Council and thus lose influence over security matters 
in Singapore. That, together with the absence of a colonial government, 
could make the threat of communism in Singapore harder to contain.
Besides, the Tunku was concerned that the PAP might be taken over by
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 101) ---
members who were sympathetic towards communism. In his eyes, that 
would result in a Singapore government less willing to consider a merger 
on terms acceptable to Malaya. 
He also realised that Singapore would probably be less dangerous once it  
became part of Malaysia as the communist elements in Singapore could  
then be controlled by the government in Malaysia. Having fought the 
communists during the Malayan Emergency (1948–1960), the Tunku feared
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 101) ---
that if Singapore became an independent country that turned communist, 
it could influence others to consider a communist government as an 
alternative.
Hong Lim By-Election
The Hong Lim by-election5 in April 1961 further fuelled the Tunku’s fears 
and led him to support the idea of a merger. The Hong Lim area had been 
represented by the PAP’s Ong Eng Guan who served as Mayor of Singapore’s 
City Council. After winning a seat in the Legislative Assembly in the 1959
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 101) ---
election, he was appointed Minister for National Development. By 1960, 
Ong had started to fall out of favour within the PAP because his actions as 
Minister were not in line with the party’s directions. 
In June 1960, when Ong openly challenged the PAP leadership at one of 
its party conferences, he was suspended as Minister. He was later expelled 
from the party and made to resign his seat in the Legislative Assembly. 
This triggered the Hong Lim by-election. Contesting as an independent
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 101) ---
candidate, Ong defeated the PAP’s candidate with 73.3 per cent of the vote.
The by-election worried the Tunku as it pointed to the increasing divide 
within the PAP. One group had moderate views and wanted to bring about 
political change gradually through elections. The other group, which 
included Ong, had radical views and pushed for drastic changes. They were 
seen to be willing to take more forceful measures to achieve their aims.
92
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 102) ---
Headline in The Sunday Times, 28 May 1961, after 
Tunku Abdul Rahman proposed a union between 
Malaya and Singapore and the creation of a new 
federation
 Tunku Abdul Rahman with Prime Minister Lee Kuan 
Yew, 16 November 1961
 Cartoon in The Straits Times showing Prime 
Minister Lee Kuan Yew and Tunku Abdul Rahman 
making plans for a merger between Singapore and 
Malaya, 29 July 1961With Ong’s win, it seemed to the Tunku that the moderate group was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 102) ---
losing its influence in the PAP. This increased his fear that the radical group 
would gain control of the party. He was worried by the prospect of a more 
radical PAP that wanted to free Singapore from British colonial rule by 
establishing a communist government through forceful means. He was also 
concerned that Singapore would be used as a base to spread communist 
ideas in Malaya.
Agreement on Proposed Merger
The Tunku signalled his change of heart in a speech on 27 May 1961, a
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 102) ---
month after the Hong Lim by-election. In this momentous speech, with 
Singapore ministers in the audience, he highlighted the prospect of a 
merger between Malaya and Singapore as part of the formation of a new 
federation including other territories such as Brunei, North Borneo and 
Sarawak. Bringing in these territories would help to offset Singapore’s 
Chinese majority (see Figure 8.2 on page 91).
Shortly after, Singapore’s Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew declared his
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 102) ---
support for the Tunku’s suggestion. They began discussions on a merger 
that would lead to the formation of the Federation of Malaysia. However, 
the radical group within the PAP objected to merger as they felt that once 
Singapore became independent through merger, they would be put down 
by the federal government in Malaya, who controlled internal security. The 
radical group within the PAP decided to sabotage the PAP by asking voters
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 102) ---
to support the opposition candidates instead. This resulted in the PAP 
candidate losing the Anson by-election on 15 July 1961, which sealed the 
Tunku’s commitment to the formation of Malaysia. 
On 24 August 1961, Prime Minister Lee and the Tunku came to an agreement 
on the broad terms of merger. According to the agreement, Singapore 
would have a special status in Malaysia. The key points were outlined in 
a government report in November 1961 (see Figure 8.3 on the next page).
93
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 102) ---
93
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 103) ---
Figure 8.3: Key points of the proposed merger as outlined by a Singapore government report in November 1961
Key Points 
of the 
Proposed 
Merger
Singapore would collect 
its own revenue and pay 
Kuala Lumpur an agreed-
upon sum (to cover the cost 
of federal services such 
as telecommunications, 
defence and security).
Singapore would  
have its own  
Head of State. 
Singapore citizens  
would be given the title of 
“federal nationals” instead 
of “federal citizens”.
Singapore could
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 103) ---
of “federal citizens”.
Singapore could  
hold its own elections 
to choose its own state 
government. Singapore 
citizens would only be able 
to vote in elections held in 
Singapore.
The federal government, 
stationed in Kuala Lumpur, 
would oversee Singapore’s 
defence, internal security 
and dealings with foreign 
governments. 
Singapore would  
have control over its 
education and labour 
matters, and its  
own civil service.
94
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 104) ---
What Was the Result of the 
“Battle for Merger”?
The British agreed to the broad terms of merger. However, the proposed 
merger met with fierce opposition from some groups within Singapore. 
Opposition from Barisan Sosialis
While most PAP leaders were in favour of the proposed merger, some 
within the party, such as Lim Chin Siong and Fong Swee Suan, strongly 
opposed it. They felt that the terms were unfavourable to the people in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 104) ---
Singapore, and tried to get support from other PAP members to challenge 
Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew’s leadership. However, they did not succeed 
and were later expelled from the PAP. The expelled members subsequently 
established a new party: the Barisan Sosialis Singapura (Socialist Front of 
Singapore). Dr Lee Siew Choh became Chairman of the party while Lim 
was its Secretary-General.
Who was  
DR LEE SIEW CHOH?
?
Dr Lee Siew Choh (1917–2002) was 
born in Kuala Lumpur, Malaya. He
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 104) ---
born in Kuala Lumpur, Malaya. He 
came to Singapore in 1934 to study 
at the King Edward VII College 
of Medicine and worked at the 
Kandang Kerbau (KK) Hospital after 
graduating. 
A fervent anti-colonialist, Dr Lee 
joined the PAP in 1958, and a year 
later was elected to the Legislative 
Assembly. In 1961, he was dismissed 
from the PAP and formed the Barisan 
Sosialis. After Singapore’s separation 
from Malaysia, he led the Barisan 
Members of Parliament to boycott the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 104) ---
Members of Parliament to boycott the 
country’s first parliamentary session.  
In 1988, the Barisan Sosialis merged 
with the Workers’ Party (WP), and 
Dr Lee contested the Eunos Group 
Representation Constituency as a 
WP candidate. He lost by a small 
margin but was appointed a Non-
Constituency Member of Parliament 
(NCMP) from 1989 to 1991. In 1993, 
he retired from politics.
 Dr Lee Siew Choh speaking at a Barisan Sosialis mass rally in Geylang Serai, 1962. The posters in the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 104) ---
photograph display anti-colonialist messages.
95
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 105) ---
The Barisan Sosialis opposed the proposed merger for several reasons. One 
issue was the status of the Singapore population within the new federation. 
The Barisan Sosialis members were concerned that citizenship would not 
be automatically granted to Singapore citizens. Singapore citizens would 
only be known as “federal nationals” and could vote only in Singapore 
elections.  
Read Source 2 to find out why the issue of citizenship was of such concern 
to the Barisan Sosialis.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 105) ---
to the Barisan Sosialis.
Another issue was the allocation of seats in the federal 
parliament. In exchange for having control over its 
education and labour, Singapore would have only 15 seats, 
while North Borneo and Sarawak were given more seats 
despite their smaller population. The Barisan Sosialis 
felt that the under-representation of Singapore in the 
Malaysian Parliament was a sign of its second-class status. 
In September 1961, the Barisan Sosialis started a campaign
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 105) ---
to oppose the proposed merger. They organised student 
demonstrations and labour strikes. Several party leaders 
also participated in radio forums to debate issues 
surrounding the proposed merger.
Will Singapore citizens be able to move freely or enter or leave the Federation without restriction? ... Will the workers of 
Singapore be able to apply for jobs in the Federation on an equal footing with Federal citizens [after merger]? … Will the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 105) ---
businessmen in Singapore have equal rights and opportunities as Federation businessmen ...? … [Or] will their lack of 
Federation citizenship be a discriminating factor …? ... Let the Government answer all these questions. 
– Adapted from a speech by Dr Lee Siew Choh in Parliament, delivered on 21 November 1961.  
During the parliamentary debates, Dr Lee highlighted the reasons for his party’s opposition to merger.SOURCE 2
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 105) ---
1. According to Source 2, why was the issue of citizenship a concern to the Barisan Sosialis? 
Based on population size, Singapore should have been 
allocated about 24 seats in the federal parliament, while 
North Borneo and Sarawak should have been allocated 7 
and 11 seats respectively. However, the merger terms gave 
Singapore 15 seats, while North Borneo and Sarawak had 
16 and 24 seats respectively. DID YOU KNOW?
 Participants discussing the merger in a Radio Singapore forum held
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 105) ---
on 12 June 1962. From left to right: Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew and  
Dr Goh Keng Swee from the PAP, John Duclos (Head of Broadcasting 
Department, Radio Singapore, and Chairman of the forum), Ong Eng Guan 
from the United People’s Party, David Marshall from the Workers’ Party,  
and Dr Lee Siew Choh from the Barisan Sosialis.SingaporeNo. of Federal Parliament Seats
North Borneo Sarawak0510152025No. of seats allocated24
716 15
1124
Actual allocation based
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 105) ---
716 15
1124
Actual allocation based 
on merger termsAllocation proportionate  
to population size
96
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 106) ---
The PAP’s Campaign
At the same time, the PAP embarked on a year-long campaign to convince the 
people of the need to merge with Malaya. From September to October 1961, 
Prime Minister Lee gave a series of radio talks called The Battle for Merger. 
Broadcast on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, they were delivered in the 
three main languages on the same evening – Mandarin at 6.45 p.m., English 
at 7.30 p.m. and Malay at 9.00 p.m. The talks were later re-broadcast in Tamil,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 106) ---
Hokkien and Cantonese. These radio broadcasts allowed Prime Minister 
Lee’s talks to reach people in Singapore, Brunei, Malaya, North Borneo and 
Sarawak. They were an important feature of a keenly contested battle for 
the hearts and minds of the people. 
Besides radio talks, the PAP also used exhibitions to highlight the benefits 
of a merger. A notable example was the Malaysia Exhibition that was part 
of Malaysia Week in early 1962. Held at the Victoria Memorial Hall (present-
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 106) ---
day Victoria Concert Hall), it was jointly organised by the governments 
of the territories that were to form the new federation. The exhibition 
aimed to showcase the close cultural and social ties among the territories. 
It exposed visitors to the lives and cultures of the people, as well as the 
trade and commerce of the territories.
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew giving one of his talks at Radio Singapore, 1961  Book titled The Battle for Merger containing Prime
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 106) ---
Minister Lee Kuan Yew’s radio speeches, published 
in 1961
 Deputy Prime Minister Dr Toh Chin Chye touring  
the Malaysia Exhibition, accompanied by Minister 
for Culture S. Rajaratnam, 1962
97
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 107) ---
Booklet setting out the details of the agreement between the Singapore and 
Malayan governments on the proposed merger, published by the Singapore 
Ministry of Culture, c. 1961 Book published by the Singapore Ministry of Culture, likely as part of the 
PAP’s wider campaign to inform the people in Singapore about the benefits of 
gaining independence through merger, 1963 Flyer published in all four official languages by the Singapore government to convince people of the benefits of merger, 1961
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 107) ---
98
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 108) ---
Diorama at the National Museum of Singapore depicting the people in 
Singapore discussing the issue of merger with Malaya Two men studying the options for the 1962 referendum Part of a flyer showing the options offered in the 1962 referendumReferendum
A referendum6 was held on 1 September 1962 following the end of these 
campaigns. The purpose of the referendum was to find out what type of 
merger the people in Singapore wanted. Voters were given three options,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 108) ---
each proposing a different form of merger (see image below). 
PAP’s preferred option was Option A while the Barisan Sosialis opposed all 
three options and urged the people to cast blank votes.
6 A referendum is a direct vote by the people on a specific issue. 
Why do you think the Barisan 
Sosialis urged the people to 
cast blank votes?Think!
99
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 109) ---
Figure 8.4: Results of the 1962 referendum
The results of the referendum were a clear indication of the people’s support 
for the government’s position: almost 71 per cent of the votes were in favour 
of Option A, while blank votes made up almost 26 per cent. Most voters had 
rejected the Barisan Sosialis’ call to cast blank votes during the referendum.
Weakening of the Barisan Sosialis
On 2 February 1963, the Internal Security Council detained more than 100
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 109) ---
people, including Lim Chin Siong and 23 other Barisan Sosialis members. 
They were accused of attempting to sabotage the formation of Malaysia, 
and planning to launch an uprising in Singapore. The series of arrests was 
code-named Operation Coldstore. 
The Barisan Sosialis, weakened by the arrests of its leaders during Operation 
Coldstore, suffered defeat in the subsequent 1963 election. The PAP won 
37 out of 51 seats, while the Barisan Sosialis managed to win only 13 seats.70.8% OPTION A
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 109) ---
I support merger giving Singapore 
autonomy in labour, education and 
other agreed matters as set out in 
Command Paper No. 33 of 1961, with 
Singapore citizens automatically 
becoming citizens of Malaysia.*
* Prime Minister Lee renegotiated the 
status of Singapore citizens in the 
Federation with the Tunku to prevent the 
Barisan Sosialis from using citizenship 
issues to oppose merger. Thereafter, 
in August 1962, he announced that 
the Tunku accepted that all Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 109) ---
the Tunku accepted that all Singapore 
citizens would become “Malaysian 
citizens” after the merger, but were 
only allowed to vote in elections for 
Singapore’s legislative body.1.7% OPTION B
I support complete and unconditional merger for Singapore as a state on an equal 
basis with the other 11 states in accordance with the Constitutional documents of 
the Federation of Malaya.I support Singapore entering Malaysia 
on terms no less favourable than those
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 109) ---
on terms no less favourable than those 
given to the Borneo territories.1.4% OPTION C25.7% BLANK VOTES0.4% REJECTED AND UNCERTAIN PAPERS
 Counting of ballot papers at the Singapore Badminton Hall counting centre during the 1962 referendum  Sealing of ballot boxes with sealing wax during the 
1962 referendum
100
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 110) ---
North Borneo and Sarawak
• Agreed to join Malaysia after 
findings from the Cobbold 
Commission* (1962) indicated 
that two-thirds of the people 
in North Borneo and Sarawak 
wanted to join Malaysia
* The Cobbold Commission was set 
up in January 1962 to inquire about 
the views of the people of North 
Borneo and Sarawak towards the 
formation of Malaysia. The findings 
were endorsed by a United Nations 
Commission (1963).Brunei
• Decided against joining Malaysia
• Gained independence from
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 110) ---
• Gained independence from 
Britain in 1984N
THE PHILIPPINES
NORTH 
BORNEO
SARAWAKMALAYA
INDONESIASINGAPOREBRUNEI
Indonesia
• Opposed the merger as it felt that it would give the British 
continued control over the territories in the new federation and 
that North Borneo and Sarawak should come under its influence
• Broke off diplomatic and trade relations with Malaysia in 1963
• Launched a policy of Konfrontasi (Confrontation) in January
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 110) ---
1963, which involved military attacks, bombings and other acts 
aimed at causing instability in the states that were to form the 
Federation (see Chapter 9, pages 129–130)
The Philippines
• Did not recognise Malaysia, 
insisting it had a rightful 
claim to North Borneo
• Broke off relations with 
Malaysia in 1963
Legend
Proposed territory for the Federation of MalaysiaReactions to the Formation of Malaysia Outside 
of Singapore and Malaya
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 110) ---
of Singapore and Malaya
Let us look at the different reactions to the formation of Malaysia outside 
Singapore and Malaya.
 Map 8.2: Map showing the proposed Malaysian territory and the reactions of countries to its formation
101
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 111) ---
The Formation of Malaysia
Despite opposition from the different groups, the merger went ahead.  
On 9 July 1963, the Malaysia Agreement was signed in London by Britain, 
Malaya, Singapore, Sabah and Sarawak. The Federation of Malaysia came into 
being on 16 September 1963. As Singapore was now one of the Federation’s 
14 member states, control of its foreign affairs and defence would be 
transferred to Malaysia.
Some of the initial terms of merger remained the same. For instance,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 111) ---
Singapore citizens would not be entitled to all the same rights as other 
Malaysian citizens, such as the right to vote in Malaysian elections outside 
of Singapore. However, other terms of merger were modified. One 
important modification was that Singapore citizens would automatically 
become citizens of the Federation of Malaysia. It was also agreed that the 
Malaysian common market would be established in stages. 
To celebrate the establishment of the Federation, festivities were held
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 111) ---
throughout the island. 
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew waving to supporters 
on his return from signing the Malaysia Agreement 
in London, July 1963
 Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall,  
16 September 1963
102
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 112) ---
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CAUSATION
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
In Chapter 5, you learnt how three types of factors – context, 
circumstances and the actions of historical actors – interact to 
contribute to a historical event or outcome. In examining causation, 
remember that the actions of historical actors can have unintended 
consequences. This is because historical actors cannot always 
accurately predict or control the following: 
• the consequences of their actions;
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 112) ---
• the consequences of their actions;
• the broader societal, political and economic conditions or opposing 
forces that will prevent them from achieving their desired outcomes; 
and 
• the reactions of others to their actions. 
As you learn more about Singapore’s separation from the Federation of 
Malaysia, think about the following question: To what extent was the 
separation a result of unintended consequences?LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how the actions of 
historical actors can
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 112) ---
how the actions of 
historical actors can 
have unintended 
consequences @  
go.gov.sg/lshc801.
Less than two years later, Singapore left the Federation of 
Malaysia. Why did the merger, which had begun with such 
promise, fail and lead to separation?
  Proclamation of Singapore’s Merger with Malaysia (in English), 1963On 16 September 1963, during the Malaysia Day 
celebrations, Prime Minister Lee jubilantly proclaimed the 
formation of Malaysia from the steps of City Hall:
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 112) ---
Now, I, Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister 
of Singapore, do hereby proclaim and 
declare, on behalf of the people of 
Singapore, that as from today, the 
16th day of September, 1963, Singapore 
shall be forever a part of the sovereign 
democratic and independent State of 
Malaysia, founded upon the principles 
of liberty and justice and ever seeking 
the welfare and happiness of her 
people in a more just and more 
equal society.
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew speaking
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 112) ---
Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew speaking 
at the Malaysia Day celebrations at 
City Hall, 16 September 1963
103
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 113) ---
Why Did Singapore Separate 
from Malaysia?
A lot of effort was put in by the various parties to create Malaysia. Yet, 
Singapore was part of it for less than two years. Both economic disagreements 
and political differences (see Figure 8.5 below) strained relations between 
the federal government in Malaysia and the state government of Singapore, 
resulting in the separation of Singapore from Malaysia on 9 August 1965.
• The common market would be set up 
for its long-term economic survival.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 113) ---
for its long-term economic survival.
• Tariffs on Singapore-made goods 
would be removed.
• Singapore would contribute 40% of its 
revenue to the federal government.• There was a delay in setting up the 
common market. 
• Tariffs continued to be imposed on 
Singapore-made goods to protect some 
of Malaya’s industries.
• The federal government increased 
Singapore’s contribution to 60% 
as defence spending had risen 
significantly due to Konfrontasi.
• Singapore felt that the decision was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 113) ---
• Singapore felt that the decision was 
unfair and that its original contribution 
was sufficient.What Singapore Expected  
as Part of the MergerIssueWhat the Federal 
Government DecidedEconomic Disagreements
Common 
Market
Revenue 
Contribution
$$Made in Singapore 
$10Made in Singapore 
$12.50Made in Singapore 
$10
40%  
of revenue60%  
of revenueMade in Singapore 
$10+25% ($2.50)
104
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 114) ---
• Singapore’s major political parties, 
such as the governing PAP, were 
multiracial and sought to represent 
the interests of all communities.
• Singapore’s government felt that 
everyone, regardless of race, should 
be given an equal opportunity to 
succeed.
• It believed that the best way of 
enabling Malays to gain better 
employment opportunities was by 
providing free education.• The federal government was formed 
by the Alliance Party, which comprised 
three communal (race-based)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 114) ---
three communal (race-based) 
parties: the United Malays National 
Organisation (UMNO), Malayan Chinese 
Association (MCA) and Malayan Indian 
Congress (MIC).
• These parties sought to look after the 
interests of their respective ethnic 
communities.
• Special privileges in employment, 
business and education were given to 
the Malays with the aim of improving 
their economic and social position. 
For instance, a certain number of jobs 
in the government were reserved for 
Malays.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 114) ---
in the government were reserved for 
Malays.
Over time, these differences in views would strain the relationship 
between the two governments. Let us see how events over the next two 
years increased tensions. Figure 8.5: Reasons for Singapore’s separation from Malaysia
SingaporeFederal Government  
of MalaysiaPolitical Differences
Issue
Composition 
of Political 
Parties
Treatment 
of Races
105
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 115) ---
In September 1963, a 
state election was held in 
Singapore. The Singapore 
branches of UMNO, MCA 
and MIC joined forces 
with the Singapore 
People’s Alliance (SPA) 
to form the Singapore 
Alliance Party (SAP).
UMNO
MCA
MIC
SPA
SAPWith the backing of the Alliance 
Party in Kuala Lumpur, the SAP 
contested the election and 
sought to win more seats in the 
Singapore Legislative Assembly.
However, the SAP performed poorly and 
failed to win a single seat. In contrast, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 115) ---
failed to win a single seat. In contrast, the 
PAP won 37 out of the 51 seats contested.
From the Alliance’s perspective, the result of 
the election was deeply disappointing. Every 
one of the seven seats previously held by the 
SPA and UMNO-Singapore had been lost to a 
PAP candidate. Moreover, Malay candidates 
from the SAP in three constituencies with 
Malay majorities had lost their seats to 
Malay PAP candidates.The PAP’s decision to participate in the 1964 federal
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 115) ---
election further strained the relationship between the PAP 
and the Alliance Party in Kuala Lumpur. During the election 
campaign, the PAP questioned the way the Alliance Party 
governed Malaysia and promised to build a Malaysia that 
would not be governed along racial lines. Though the Alliance 
won the election with the PAP winning one seat, the Alliance 
leaders were upset with the PAP for contesting the election.
After the Alliance’s victory in the federal election, UMNO
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 115) ---
decided to focus on winning back the Malay vote in 
Singapore. There was already considerable discontent 
within the Malay community in Singapore, especially among  
those who saw little improvement in their economic position.Events Leading to the SEPARATIONEvents Leading to the SEPARATION
Rising Tensions, 1963–1964
106
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 116) ---
Some UMNO leaders accused the PAP 
government of neglecting Malay interests 
in Singapore. Through the Malay press, 
especially the widely read Utusan Melayu , 
anti-PAP sentiments were spread. 
Allegations that the PAP was treating 
Singapore Malays as second-class citizens 
flew fast and furious. Utusan Melayu  
also accused the PAP of placing greater 
emphasis on Chinese education at the 
expense of Malay education.
On 12 July 1964, the Secretary-General of UMNO, Syed Ja’afar
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 116) ---
Albar, amid already simmering tensions, made a fiery anti-PAP 
speech in Singapore which raised tensions close to boiling point.
At the New Star Cinema where he spoke, chants from 
the crowd of “Kill him! … Kill him! … Othman Wok and Lee 
Kuan Yew” could be heard. Othman Wok was then Minister 
for Social Affairs. Due to his association with the PAP, he 
had been depicted as an “anti-Malay tool” of the state.
107
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 117) ---
In an attempt to ease tensions, Prime Minister Lee and Othman 
organised a meeting with over 100 non-political Malay organisations 
on 19 July 1964. They assured the 900 Malay representatives present 
that the Singapore government would do its utmost to help the Malays 
in the areas of education, employment and housing. Prime Minister Lee 
reiterated that all Singaporeans had equal rights, regardless of race.
Despite the government’s efforts to calm tensions, Utusan
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 117) ---
Melayu  continued to print articles accusing the PAP 
government of unfairly treating the Malays in Singapore. 
Eventually the racial tensions resulted in two race riots.
On 21 July 1964, an estimated 20,000 Muslims gathered at the Padang 
to commemorate Prophet Muhammad’s birthday. However, during the 
procession that followed, clashes broke out in several areas, such as along 
Geylang Road and Guillemard Road. As news of the clashes spread, so did
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 117) ---
the riots. The violence resulted in the loss of 23 lives and 454 people were 
injured. To restore order, a curfew was imposed across the island.1964 Riots
108
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 118) ---
After the riots, Goodwill Committees, comprising 
community leaders from the various racial groups,  
were formed to calm tensions and restore 
harmonious relations among the different races.However, tensions did not disappear. About 
six weeks later, riots broke out, triggered by 
the murder of a Malay trishaw rider on  
2 September 1964. An islandwide curfew 
was imposed again. By the time it was lifted, 
13 people had died and 106 were injured.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 118) ---
13 people had died and 106 were injured.
This latest wave of violence prompted the Alliance 
Party in Kuala Lumpur and the PAP to agree not to 
raise any matters that were racial in nature. Both 
also agreed not to challenge each other in elections 
for the next two years.The agreement did not last long. In October 
1964, the SAP announced that the party would 
be reorganised with the intention of contesting 
and winning the next election. The announcement
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 118) ---
and winning the next election. The announcement 
served as a direct political challenge to the PAP.
In response, the PAP brought together four 
other Malaysian opposition parties to establish 
the Malaysian Solidarity Convention (MSC). 
The MSC was to campaign for a “Malaysian 
Malaysia” where all would be treated equally, 
regardless of their race or religion.The campaign upset the Alliance leaders and 
deepened their mistrust of the PAP government.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 118) ---
deepened their mistrust of the PAP government. 
They felt that the idea of a “Malaysian Malaysia” 
threatened the special rights enjoyed by the 
Malays. Some UMNO leaders even called for 
Prime Minister Lee’s arrest.
PAP
UMNO-MCA-MIC Alliance
PAP
Alliance Party in Kuala Lumpur
SAP
109
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
LEARN A SKILL: USING EYEWITNESS ACCOUNTS
The following account is adapted from an oral interview with Othman Wok, 
who was then PAP’s Minister for Social Affairs. When the riot broke out, he 
was leading a PAP contingent of Malay-Muslim youths in a procession from 
the Padang, where a mass celebration of Prophet Muhammad’s birthday had 
taken place, to Geylang Serai. The interview was conducted with the National 
Museum of Singapore and was recorded in 2006.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
Museum of Singapore and was recorded in 2006.
As our contingent passed [along Beach Road and into Arab Street], there were 
people following us in the five-foot way ... And somewhere down there, a group of 
Malay youth, who shouted in Malay when they saw the PAP flags, “Hidup Cina! ” 
That means: “long live the Chinese”. “Mati Melayu! ”: “death to the Malays”. The 
idea was to belittle the PAP and the PAP government, to make a division with
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
the Malays on one side and the Chinese on the other side. ...
[When the contingent was at Kallang Bridge (present-day Merdeka Bridge)]  
I looked back, I saw a couple of participants from other contingents break rank. * 
And there were uniformed policemen following the procession and they stopped 
them from breaking rank. I think the people, the participants, were quite tired 
and hot, because it was a very, very hot day. They wanted to find shelter in the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
five-foot way. So when they were asked to go back, they became very angry. 
They started chasing the policemen. ...
I told my contingent, “We break rank here.” So I led them into the Kallang 
Airport, which was empty at that time. ... I closed the gates. Outside we could 
see people running around, chasing each other – sounds of people trying to 
help, sounds of people being beaten up.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
help, sounds of people being beaten up.
* To break ranks is to move away from the group.There are varying eyewitness accounts of the riots that broke out on 21 July 1964. When 
historians want to find out about a past event, they may look at what eyewitnesses have 
said about it. Eyewitnesses are people who experienced or observed the historical 
event. Eyewitness accounts can be valuable evidence as they provide  
first-hand information on people’s experiences of historical events.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
However, in using eyewitness accounts, you must consider 
their reliability. For example, would an account given 
by a person shortly after an event be more or less 
reliable than one given by the same person 20 
years later?
Read the following eyewitness account of 
the riots that broke out on 21 July 1964. 
What does it tell you about the event?
Map 8.3: Map showing the locations of some 
of the places mentioned in Othman Wok’s 
and Seah Chiang Nee’s accounts of the riots 
of 21 July 1964
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
of 21 July 1964
Victoria StreetGeylang Road
Arab Street
Beach RoadKallang Road
PadangNSite of former Kallang GasworksSite of former Kallang AirportSite of former Happy World
Capitol Building
City HallLegend
Route of procession from 
Padang to Geylang Lorong 12Nicoll HighwayFormer Kallang BridgeGeylang Lor 12
Who was  
OTHMAN WOK?
?
Othman Wok (1924–2017) was born  
in Singapore. In 1950, Othman 
pursued his diploma in journalism 
in London on a scholarship. After his
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
in London on a scholarship. After his 
studies in London, he began work with 
the Malay newspaper Utusan Melayu  
and later became its deputy editor.
 
In 1963, Othman was elected as 
the representative for Pasir Panjang 
constituency. He was appointed 
Director of the Malay Affairs Bureau 
in 1963 and Minister for Culture and 
Social Affairs in 1965. From June 
1977 to 1980, he was the Ambassador 
to Indonesia. Othman retired from 
politics in 1981 and 
was awarded the 
Order of Nila
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 119) ---
was awarded the 
Order of Nila 
Utama (Second 
Class) in 1990.
110
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 120) ---
One way of approaching eyewitness accounts is to use the Claim-Support-Question framework to think about 
how they could improve your understanding of particular historical events. Look at the steps below.
Support:  
What do you know or what 
can you find that might 
support these claims?Claim:  
What does the  
account tell you?Question:  
What further questions do 
you need to raise in order to 
check these claims?1 2 3Step Step Step
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 120) ---
check these claims?1 2 3Step Step Step
This approach is a reminder that when reading eyewitness accounts, you need to think about their limitations. 
Other questions you could ask include: Who was the person witnessing the event? Was the account recorded 
shortly after the event or many years later?
While the account above paints a clear picture of Othman’s experience of the riots, it comes from a single
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 120) ---
point of view. For a more complete understanding of people’s experiences of the event, you need to consider 
other accounts, including official reports or secondary accounts by people who may not be eyewitnesses to 
the event. Here is another eyewitness account of the riots.Let us now look at how this framework might be applied to Othman’s account.
Claim Support Question
 A group of Malay youths shouted 
words that reflected negative 
feelings between the Chinese 
and Malays, which could have
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 120) ---
and Malays, which could have 
contributed to the outbreak of 
the riots. Based on Othman’s eyewitness 
account, the riots were in part 
due to some participants who 
broke rank and the dispute they 
had with the policemen. The 
Malay youths seem to be fanning 
the chaos and contributing to 
the violence. What do other accounts tell 
you about why the riots broke 
out?
 What might have been left out 
by this account about why the 
riots broke out?1 2 3
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 120) ---
riots broke out?1 2 3
The following account is adapted from an oral interview with Seah Chiang Nee, who was working for the news agency 
Reuters when the riots broke out. The interview was recorded in 2002.
[My New Zealander colleague and I] left ... in an old broken [car] and we drove to Geylang. As we drove past the gasworks 
[present-day Kallang Riverside Park], we [drove] along Happy World, we already saw that things were not quite right; a lot
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 120) ---
of smoke was blowing in from the other end of Geylang. As we [went] a little further, we saw burnt cars, overturned cars. 
The crowd had totally disappeared. When we [drove] farther, we saw [in a] distance, [a big group] of people making noise, 
running around ... Most of them were Malays.
111
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 121) ---
With your knowledge of how the riots broke out and having read Seah’s account, fill in the table below:
Now that you have read two eyewitness accounts of the riots, consider these questions:
• In what ways do the accounts differ?
• Why do they differ?
• How do they improve your understanding of the event?
Although eyewitness accounts are valuable pieces of evidence that help historians study past events,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 121) ---
they have their limitations. This is why historians do not rely only on one type of evidence, such as 
accounts narrated or written by people who may have experienced events as an eyewitness. From what 
you have learnt so far, what other types of evidence would you use to help you understand the riots of  
21 July 1964?Claim Support Question 1 2 3
We just [drove] past them. ... We didn’t know that it was a racial riot. When
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 121) ---
we got near, we saw that this guy was yelling at us, shouting at us. Suddenly I 
looked. They were all Malays and then the cars were burning ...
There [were] no police, so we did a U-turn and one bottle came crashing down 
on the windscreen and a second one hit the top of the car. We just turned 
and drove out of there! We went 
around, driving around the centre 
of town … The shops had all closed. 
We passed Capitol Building and we 
saw one Malay cowering behind some
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 121) ---
saw one Malay cowering behind some 
signboards, those boards. [When] he 
saw that [our car was being driven 
by] a European ... he came out quickly, 
frantically. He stopped our car ... and 
came in. His face was all white and 
shivering.
  Seah Chiang NeeLEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how eyewitness 
accounts can help 
provide first-hand 
information on 
people’s experiences 
of historical events @  
go.gov.sg/lshc802 .
112
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 122) ---
Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew announcing the 
separation of Singapore from Malaysia,  
9 August 1965The Call for Separation
By mid-1965, Tunku Abdul Rahman was convinced that the differences 
between the federal government and the state government of Singapore 
could not be resolved. He saw the 1964 racial clashes as a sign of the 
disorder that would spread throughout the Federation if these differences 
persisted. He felt that it would be best for Singapore to leave Malaysia.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 122) ---
In fact, a few PAP leaders also thought that separation would, perhaps, 
help bring an end to the problems. By July 1965, secret negotiations on 
Singapore’s exit from the Federation had begun. 
Within a few weeks, the Independence of Singapore Agreement was 
signed and Singapore was no longer a part of Malaysia. On 9 August 1965, 
an emotional Prime Minister Lee announced Singapore’s separation from 
the Federation in a live televised press conference:
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 122) ---
Everytime we look back to the moment we signed this 
document it is for us a moment of anguish. … All my 
life, my whole adult life, I have believed in merger and 
the unity of the two territories. We are connected 
by geography, economics and ties of kinship. It broke 
everything we stood for.
– Adapted from The Straits Times, 10 August 1965
113
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 123) ---
Proclamation of Singapore, 9 August 1965
Edmund William Barker (1920–2001), commonly known as E. W . Barker, was born 
in Singapore. Excelling in both sports and academics, he won a Queen’s Scholarship 
to study law at Cambridge University. He went on to practise law from 1952 to 1964. 
Initially hesitant to enter politics, Barker successfully contested 
the Tanglin seat under the PAP banner in 1963 and was re-elected 
unopposed six times. He held several ministerial positions including
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 123) ---
Minister for Law (1964–1988), and other prominent positions, such 
as the first President of the Singapore National Olympic Council 
(1970–1990). Barker retired from politics in 1988 and was 
awarded the Order of Nila Utama (First Class) in 1990. The Proclamation of Singapore, drafted by Minister for Law E. W. Barker, 
was signed by Prime Minister Lee on 9 August 1965. It formally declared 
that Singapore was no longer “a state of Malaysia and shall become an
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 123) ---
independent and sovereign state and nation separate from and independent 
of Malaysia” .
The next day, newspapers in Singapore carried the news of separation on 
their front pages. With its departure from the Federation, Singapore was 
now an independent nation. It became a republic7 with Yusof bin Ishak as 
its first President. 
Who was  
E. W. BARKER?
?
7 A republic is a country without a king or queen, usually governed by elected representatives of the people and a president.LEARN ON THE GO
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 123) ---
Find out what the 
Proclamation of 
Singapore reveals 
about Singapore’s 
separation from 
Malaysia @ 
go.gov.sg/lshc803.
114
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 124) ---
Singapore’s separation from Malaysia on 9 August 1965 was greeted with 
mixed responses. Many raised concerns over Singapore’s ability to survive 
on its own. In the next two chapters, you will learn about the steps 
Singapore took to cope with the challenges it faced as an independent 
nation and what it did to ensure its survival in the long term.
 Headline in The Straits Times, 10 August 1965, proclaiming the separation of Singapore from MalaysiaConclusion
115
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 124) ---
115
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 125) ---
In this chapter, you learnt about Singapore’s merger with Malaya in 1963 and the eventual separation in 
1965. Based on what you have read in this chapter, write down the reasons which brought about merger 
and separation in the tables below. Consider how these reasons contributed to the outcomes. An example 
has been done for you.LET’S REVIEW
Reasons for Merger
Reasons for Separation
Economic
PoliticalArea Reason How Did It Contribute to the Separation?
EconomicEstablishment of a
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 125) ---
EconomicEstablishment of a 
common marketA common market established through merger would help in 
Singapore’s economic survival. This is because Singapore would 
have a bigger market to sell its manufactured goods. T rade would 
then increase and more jobs would be created for the people. Area Reason How Did It Contribute to the Merger?
Political
116
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 126) ---
When Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew announced Singapore’s separation from the Federation of Malaysia on 
9 August 1965, he referred to it as “a moment of anguish”. 
Various people responded differently to the news of Singapore’s departure from the Federation. Was 
Singapore’s separation from Malaysia really unexpected? Read the following sources to find out more.Was Singapore’s separation from Malaysia unexpected?CASE INVESTIGATION
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 126) ---
No, far from it. That was what I had in mind all the time … it was necessary for us to have [Singapore] before we could 
have the other two states in Borneo [Sabah and Sarawak]. So I agreed to what Lee Kuan Yew wanted … Anyway, I didn’t 
intend to keep Singapore all the time.
– Tunku Abdul Rahman’s response when asked if he regretted Singapore’s departure  
from the Federation of Malaysia, adapted from a 1985 interviewSOURCE A
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 126) ---
I felt that perhaps there were a lot of overreactions on both sides, that eventually led to the rush, pushing through 
Malaysia. There is a Chinese saying, “If one rushes to do something, one could hardly accomplish one’s aim.” Malaysia 
was finally pushed through … However, in the meantime, differences between the Alliance and PAP leadership seemed to 
widen and the situation or relations between the two deteriorated. 
– Adapted from a 1995 oral interview with Lim Chin Siong,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 126) ---
former Barisan Sosialis Secretary-General SOURCE B
Crestfallen! It was totally unexpected! Although of course the situation was getting more tense, day by day. But the 
breakup was unexpected. It was a great disappointment. We had been fighting for Malaysia all along, since we started the 
PAP. I campaigned so hard for merger during the Referendum. It was very, very disappointing. 
– Adapted from an account by Ong Pang Boon, who was Singapore’s Education Minister
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 126) ---
when Singapore left the Federation of Malaysia, published in 1996SOURCE C
117
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 127) ---
We were determined to get out. I think they [the federal government] were just as determined that we should go … There 
were no second thoughts … I never understood why we joined [Malaysia]. There were reasons, I suppose, but these 
reasons didn’t convince me. What have we got to do with the Borneo states [Sabah and Sarawak]? Except for the British 
currency, what connection or relationship [was] there between Sabah and Sarawak and Singapore? … Malaya of course
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 127) ---
is closer. But I didn’t agree. So I thought that separation would be in our best interest.
– Adapted from a 1982 oral interview with E. W. Barker, former Law Minister of Singapore,  
who was involved in drafting the Separation AgreementSOURCE D
It is to be noted that Singapore ministers did make statements … which indicated that the PAP was not all thinking of 
[separation] … On 6 June 1965, [Lee Kuan Yew] declared that “Malaysia will be a nation that will survive for hundreds
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 127) ---
of years as a separate identity in Southeast Asia”. On 15 July, he stated that the initiative now rested with the Tunku to 
“resolve this [conflict between the federal government and the PAP] quietly and go on with economic development”. On 
25 July 1965, Lee declared that he was confident that the concept of a Malaysian Malaysia would be accepted by people 
in ten years’ time.
–  Adapted from an account by Mohamed Noordin Sopiee, a Malaysian academic, originally published in 1976SOURCE E
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 127) ---
I think a number of Malaysians [were] disappointed [when Singapore left the Federation] as much as a number of 
Singaporeans were disappointed, and particularly the UMNO Singapore, [were] disappointed because there [was] no 
Referendum. I do not know [why, even] now; nobody has ever stated why there should be no Referendum … But the 
people of Singapore and Malaysia thought that [when] we [wanted] Malaysia, [when] we [went] into Malaysia, there was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 127) ---
a Referendum. Then suddenly, when we [wanted] to leave Malaysia, there [was] no Referendum. And we believe that if 
there had been a Referendum, Singapore will be still in Malaysia.
–  Adapted from a 1984 oral interview with Tan Sri Syed Esa Almenoar, formerly a prominent member of Singapore UMNOSOURCE F
118
SINGAPORE’S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE (1942–1965)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 128) ---
1. Read Source A. What does this source suggest about the Tunku’s reasons for agreeing to the merger in the 
first place? 
2. Read Source B. Does it support the idea that separation was unexpected? What reason does it give?
3. Read Sources C and D. Based on the accounts of Ong Pang Boon and E. W. Barker, why did members 
of the PAP government have differing responses to the separation?
4. Read Sources E and F. Do the sources suggest that separation was unexpected? What might be the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 128) ---
reasons for the feelings expressed towards separation? INVESTIGATE!
Use the sources above to complete the following table. An example has been done for you.REPORT!
SourceWas the Separation 
Expected or Unexpected?Explanation with Details from the Source
Source A ExpectedIn Source A, the T unku said he expected the separation to happen 
after achieving his goal of merging the Borneo territories with the 
Federation of Malaya. He had only agreed to the merger with Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 128) ---
so that he could incorporate the Borneo territories and did not expect 
Singapore to remain within the Federation.
Source B
Source C
Source D
Source E
Source F
Based on the points you have written down, what do you think were the reasons that determined whether 
the various parties found the separation unexpected?
119
HOW DID SINGAPORE BECOME AN INDEPENDENT NATION?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 129) ---
DR GOH KENG SWEE 
LEE KUAN YEW
DR TOH CHIN CHYE
LIM KIM SAN
Lee Kuan Yew (pictured centre) was Singapore’s first Prime Minister 
(1959–1990) and played an important role in transforming Singapore 
into the modern nation-state it is today. He was appointed Senior 
Minister in 1990, and later Minister Mentor in 2004.
Dr Goh Keng Swee (pictured centre) was the first Minister of Interior  
and Defence (1965–1967) and played a key role in forming the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 129) ---
Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) and implementing compulsory  
National Service. He was also known as Singapore’s “economic architect” 
and headed other ministries such as finance and education. 
Dr Toh Chin Chye (pictured centre) was Singapore’s first Deputy Prime 
Minister (1959–1968) and played a key role in the development of 
Singapore’s technological, scientific and educational institutions.
Lim Kim San (pictured front left) was the first Chairman of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 129) ---
the Housing & Development Board (HDB; 1960–1963), where  
he led the development of Singapore’s successful public housing 
programme. He was the first Minister for Finance (1965–1967)  
and also helmed other ministries such as defence.
Singapore’s First Post-Independence Cabinet
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 130) ---
S. RAJARATNAM
OTHMAN WOK
E. W. BARKER
ONG PANG BOON
YONG NYUK LIN
JEK YEUN THONG
S. Rajaratnam (pictured left) was Singapore’s first Foreign Minister 
(1965–1980) and played a vital role in building up Singapore’s status 
in the international community. He was involved in drafting the National 
Pledge. He served as Singapore’s second Deputy Prime Minister and also 
headed the labour and culture ministries.
Ong Pang Boon (pictured centre) was Singapore’s Minister for Education
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 130) ---
(1963–1970) and was crucial in the transformation of Singapore’s 
education system. He also held ministerial portfolios for labour, 
environment and communications.
Othman Wok (pictured centre) was Singapore’s first Minister  
for Social Affairs (1963–1977) and played a key role in improving  
the quality of social welfare services in Singapore. He also served  
in the Ministry for Culture.
Yong Nyuk Lin (pictured front left) served as Minister for Health
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 130) ---
(1963–1968) and also took on the communications portfolio. He 
made substantial contributions to the reorganisation of Singapore’s 
hospital services and was involved in key projects such as the creation 
of Singapore Airlines and the early studies of the feasibility of the Mass 
Rapid Transit (MRT) system.
E. W. Barker (pictured with garland) was Singapore’s first Minister for Law 
(1964–1988) and played a significant role in drawing up the agreement
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 130) ---
for Singapore’s separation from Malaysia in 1965. He also helmed the 
national development, environment, science and technology,  
and home affairs ministries.
Jek Yeun Thong (pictured centre) served as Minister for Labour  
(1963–1968), and also held ministerial portfolios for culture, and 
science and technology. He was a strong advocate of building a 
Singaporean identity and was instrumental in laying the groundwork  
for good labour relations.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 131) ---
4
In this unit, we will examine Singapore’s status as an independent nation-state – a status that  
was not easily attained or expected, by many of its leaders and its people. Little more than a city, 
Singapore had to survive in a global and regional environment that was fraught with challenges 
during that period. Through enterprise and perseverance, Singapore not only managed to 
resolve and overcome many challenges but also became a thriving nation-state by the end of  
the 1970s.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 131) ---
the 1970s.
From the pictures on these two pages, what do you think were the challenges faced by Singapore 
in the post-independence years? How did Singapore overcome these challenges?Surviving as an Independent Nation-State  
(1965–Late 1970s)
OVERVIEW UNIT
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 134) ---
125
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
 Young men reporting for National Service,  
7 May 1968
1 A nation-state refers to an independent country whose people share similarities, such as a common national identity, history 
and culture.In Chapter 8, you learnt about the hopes Singapore carried into the merger 
and how they were dashed when it left the Federation of Malaysia and 
became a nation-state.1 For many, it was unthinkable that Singapore could
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 134) ---
survive on its own, without Britain or Malaysia. Yet this was the situation it 
faced on 9 August 1965. 
To make things more difficult, Singapore became independent in a time 
of international tensions and regional conflicts. Many Singaporeans 
wondered how this young country would be able to make its way safely in 
an uncertain world.
In this chapter, you will learn about the security challenges Singapore faced 
after gaining independence in 1965. You will also learn how it overcame
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 134) ---
these challenges, creating the conditions for Singaporeans to enjoy better 
lives.CHAPTER  
9
How Did Singapore Safeguard  
Its Independence After 1965?
You will learn:
• What security challenges 
Singapore faced after it 
gained independence in 1965
• How Singapore overcame 
these challengesChapter at a Glance
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 135) ---
Beyond SingaporeThe Vietnam War begins. Konfrontasi (Confrontation) 
begins when Indonesia 
opposes the formation of  
the Federation of Malaysia.
MacDonald House is bombed 
during Konfrontasi.
Singapore attains 
independence.
Singapore joins the United 
Nations (UN), and its status 
as an independent state is 
internationally recognised.The Vietnam War intensifies 
as the United States sends 
more troops to defend South 
Vietnam against communist 
North Vietnam.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 135) ---
Vietnam against communist 
North Vietnam.
Konfrontasi ends. In Singapore Scene just after the MacDonald 
House bombing, 10 March 1965 The Vietnam War pitted the communist 
government of North Vietnam against 
the government of South Vietnam and 
its main ally, the United States. US troops landing at Red Beach in 
Saigon (present-day Ho Chi Minh City) to 
defend a nearby airbase, 10 April 1965
North 
Vietnam
South 
Vietnam
1965 1954 1963 1966Thailand
CambodiaLaos
126
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 135) ---
1965 1954 1963 1966Thailand
CambodiaLaos
126
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)Timeline
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 136) ---
The British announce 
the withdrawal of their 
defence forces from Asia, 
including Singapore.The Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) is formed.The Five Power Defence 
Arrangements (FDPA) 
between Singapore, Australia, 
Malaysia, New Zealand and 
Britain is established.
The United States and  
North Vietnam reach a peace 
agreement that brings an end 
to direct US involvement in 
the war.South Vietnam falls 
to North Vietnam, 
resulting in the 
reunification of the 
country.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 136) ---
resulting in the 
reunification of the 
country. 
National Service 
(NS) is introduced. 
The Chartered Industries of 
Singapore (CIS) is established to 
manufacture ammunition and 
weapons for the Singapore Armed 
Forces (SAF).The majority of British 
forces withdraw from 
Singapore. The ferry boat Laju is 
hijacked by terrorists.
 First batch of national 
servicemen taking the Oath  
of Allegiance, August 1967
 The ferry boat Laju, 
hijacked in 1974 Founding members of ASEAN in
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 136) ---
hijacked in 1974 Founding members of ASEAN in 
Bangkok, 8 August 1967
 People fleeing by boat shortly 
before Saigon (capital of South 
Vietnam) fell to advancing North 
Vietnamese troops, 1975
1967 1971 1974 1975 1973
127
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 137) ---
What Security Challenges Did 
Singapore Face in 1965?
Safeguarding the independence of the country is a priority for all 
governments, and Singapore was no exception. To do so, it had to enhance 
internal security and build a strong defence force. These were important 
for ensuring peace and stability, which would help attract foreign investors 
to set up factories and businesses in Singapore, contributing to the 
development of the economy and the creation of jobs. Therefore, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 137) ---
government decided to bolster the security of Singapore quickly.
Read Source 1 to find out more about Singapore’s priorities after gaining 
independence.
In Chapter 7, you learnt about the Cold War and how the worldwide  
struggle between communist and non-communist blocs affected  
Singapore and Malaya. The Singapore government was concerned that by 
the 1960s, the Cold War had intensified, threatening stability in parts of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 137) ---
Southeast Asia. At the same time, it was believed that ongoing tensions in 
the region might contribute to Singapore’s security challenges.
ARTHUR COOK:  You have in the past told me – in fact, I think you’ve told practically every journalist – you cannot do 
without the [British military] bases.
LEE KUAN YEW: Yes.
ARTHUR COOK: But you want them there [the bases here] to feed your people?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 137) ---
LEE KUAN YEW:  I want them there [here] first, to protect my people because we have not got the wherewithal [means 
to do so ourselves]. We have got two battalions, 5,000 police and two or three reserve units with 
arms. 
ARTHUR COOK:  But I understood from you the first thing to think of was the economic side.
LEE KUAN YEW: No, no, no. The first thing to think of is physical survival …
– Adapted from an interview with Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 137) ---
by journalist Arthur Cook of the Daily Mail at the studio of Television Singapore, 30 August 1965SOURCE 1
1. According to Source 1, what were Prime Minister Lee’s priorities for Singapore after it became independent in 1965?
128
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 138) ---
Australian troops boarding a helicopter in Sarawak, 1965. Many troops from 
the British Commonwealth were deployed to monitor the long border that 
Malaysia shared with Indonesia.N
Sabah
Sarawak
KalimantanMALAYSIA
INDONESIA
 Map 9.1: Map showing the long land border (highlighted in red) between 
Malaysia and Indonesia
2 The Commonwealth is an association of former British colonies. Its member countries cooperate informally in many areas such 
as defence, education and culture. Konfrontasi
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 138) ---
as defence, education and culture. Konfrontasi
One source of regional tensions was Konfrontasi 
(Confrontation), a policy Indonesia pursued against 
the formation of the Federation of Malaysia, which 
Singapore was a part of from 16 September 1963 to  
9 August 1965. Indonesian President Sukarno opposed 
the Federation of Malaysia as he believed it would give 
the British continued control of the territories in the 
Federation. Sukarno also had ambitions of uniting the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 138) ---
Malay Archipelago under his leadership. 
During Konfrontasi from 1963 to 1966, there was fighting 
between the Indonesian, Malaysian and Commonwealth2 
forces along the long land border that Malaysia shared 
with Indonesia (see Map 9.1). Indonesia also carried out 
acts of sabotage in Malaysia. Many soldiers, including 
a number from Singapore, spent months patrolling the 
border.
129
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 139) ---
Aftermath of the MacDonald House bombing, 10 March 1965
 Present-day 
MacDonald HouseKonfrontasi posed a serious security threat to Singapore 
even before its separation from Malaysia. As many as 
42 bombings were carried out by Indonesian saboteurs 
in Singapore during the conflict. Initially, they targeted 
military facilities and public utilities, but these were often 
heavily guarded and difficult to attack. Thus, the saboteurs 
began setting off bombs in public places to terrorise the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 139) ---
population and disrupt life in Singapore. 
In response to the bombings, the Singapore government 
introduced several measures. Singaporeans were advised 
to stay on high alert and to avoid handling suspicious-
looking parcels in buildings and along streets. A volunteer 
force was deployed to patrol neighbourhoods, and 
schools carried out emergency drills. 
The deadliest incident during Konfrontasi occurred on  
10 March 1965 when a bomb exploded along Orchard Road
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 139) ---
at MacDonald House (which housed the headquarters of a 
British-owned bank at the time). It killed three people and 
injured 33, and damaged nearby buildings and cars.
Two Indonesian soldiers were arrested for the MacDonald 
House bombing. They were charged with murder, found 
guilty and hanged on 17 October 1968. This triggered an 
angry response among Indonesian students, who attacked 
the Singapore embassy and homes of Singaporean
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 139) ---
the Singapore embassy and homes of Singaporean 
diplomats in Jakarta. Impact of the bombing on the interior of MacDonald House,  
10 March 1965
 A memorial was built near MacDonald House to honour those  
who had lost their lives and those who had fought during Konfrontasi.  
The memorial was unveiled on 10 March 2015. Since then, an annual 
wreath-laying ceremony has been held at the memorial on the anniversary 
of the bombing.
130
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 140) ---
Communist Terrorism 
Singapore also had to guard itself against attacks by communist groups. 
As you learnt in Chapter 7, the threat posed by the Malayan Communist 
Party (MCP) led to a state of emergency being declared. Although the 
danger of a communist takeover had lessened and the British declared the 
Emergency over in 1960, acts of terrorism by communist groups continued.
By the 1970s, the MCP had split into smaller groups. While they were no
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 140) ---
longer a formidable unified force, the communists still posed a danger 
to the internal security of Singapore. Police raids against these groups 
uncovered large quantities of weapons such as pistols and grenades. During 
this decade, the communists carried out acts of violence that included 
the killing of a seven-year-old girl in Changi in 1970, the explosion of a 
bomb in Katong in 1974 and the attempted assassination of Singapore’s 
Commissioner of Police in 1976.
International Terrorism
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 140) ---
International Terrorism
Independent Singapore experienced its first encounter with international 
terrorism on 31 January 1974 when foreign terrorists hijacked the ferry boat 
Laju and held crew members hostage. The terrorists had earlier attacked 
the Shell oil refinery on Pulau Bukom in an attempt to disrupt the oil supply 
from Singapore to South Vietnam. After several days of negotiation, the 
hijackers finally agreed to release the hostages in exchange for safe passage
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 140) ---
from Singapore to Kuwait, a country in the Middle East.
The Vietnam War 
At the same time, a large-scale conflict in Vietnam was threatening the 
stability of Southeast Asian countries, including Singapore. Read the 
illustrated story on the next page to learn more about the Vietnam War 
(1954–1975).
US helicopter setting down soldiers in the la Drang Valley, Vietnam, 14 November 1965. The Battle of la Drang 
was the first major battle between US troops and North Vietnamese forces.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 140) ---
Aftermath of the car bomb explosion at the 
junction of Still Road and East Coast Road in 
Katong, 1974
 Police talking to hijackers on 
board the ferry boat Laju, 1974To ensure safe passage of the hijackers 
of the Laju  from Singapore to Kuwait, 
a group of Singapore government 
officials, led by S. R. Nathan, 
accompanied the hijackers on their 
flight. Nathan (leaning forward in the 
image below) was then Director of the 
Security and Intelligence Division at
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 140) ---
Security and Intelligence Division at 
the Ministry of Defence, and would 
later go on to serve as President 
of Singapore. The Singapore team 
comprised Nathan, eight government 
officials and four Singapore Armed 
Forces commandos.DID YOU KNOW?
 The 13 Singaporean officials upon returning to 
Singapore from Kuwait on 9 February 1974
131
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 141) ---
Vietnam became a French colony in 
the 19th century. It was occupied by 
the Japanese during World War II.
After the Japanese surrender in 1945, a  
communist movement in Vietnam fought 
against the return of French rule. 
The conflict in Vietnam became a great concern to the 
United States and non-communist countries in Asia. 
(See Figure 7.1 on page 43 for more information on the 
ideological differences between democracy/capitalism 
and communism.) They believed that if North Vietnam
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 141) ---
won, communism would spread to neighbouring 
countries and eventually the whole region. This fear was 
heightened by the presence of communist movements 
in other Southeast Asian countries such as Malaya, the 
Philippines and Laos during the 1950s and 1960s.
To prevent a communist victory, 
the United States committed vast 
military resources to support 
South Vietnam in the war. It 
was around this time, as the 
Vietnam War was escalating, that 
Singapore gained independence.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 141) ---
Singapore gained independence. 
Like the other non-communist 
governments in Southeast 
Asian countries, the Singapore 
government feared that the fighting 
would spread to the rest of the 
region and destabilise Singapore. 
South Vietnam eventually fell to 
North Vietnam in 1975, bringing an 
end to the Vietnam War.The VIETNAM WARThe VIETNAM WAR
A peace agreement in 1954 ended 
the conflict between France and 
Vietnam, and resulted in the division 
of the country into two independent
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 141) ---
of the country into two independent 
states: communist North Vietnam and 
non-communist South Vietnam. The 
French left Vietnam in 1956 and this 
marked the end of French colonial 
rule in the country.
Despite the peace agreement, 
the fighting continued as the 
governments of both North and South 
Vietnam were determined to reunify 
the country under their own rule. 
This conflict became known as the 
Vietnam War.North 
Vietnam
South 
VietnamThailand
CambodiaLaosChina
132
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 141) ---
South 
VietnamThailand
CambodiaLaosChina
132
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)COMMUNISMCOMMUNISM
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 142) ---
British Military Withdrawal from 
Singapore 
Aside from the regional and international conflicts, 
Singapore also had to address the challenge posed by 
the withdrawal of British forces. Since 1819, Singapore had 
relied on the British Empire to defend it against external 
threats, with the majority of the troops coming from 
Britain, India and Australia. Although local volunteer 
troops had been recruited and trained from the 19th 
century onwards, they were small in number.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 142) ---
century onwards, they were small in number. 
In Chapter 5, you learnt about British plans to develop 
Singapore as a major naval base in the 1920s and 1930s 
to better protect British interests in Asia. This remained 
central to the British defence strategy after World War 
II, and Singapore’s role as a military base expanded in 
the 1950s. British warships were stationed in Singapore’s 
naval base and modern airbases were created. Thousands 
of British and Commonwealth servicemen were also
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 142) ---
of British and Commonwealth servicemen were also 
stationed in Singapore. 
 Present-day photograph of a house on the former military estate of Alexandra 
Park built in the mid-1930s to accommodate British military staff and their 
families
 Military aircraft at Royal Air Force (RAF) Changi, 1962, an important British 
airbase in the 1950s and 1960s. Part of the airbase was later converted into 
Changi Airport. 
133
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 143) ---
3 A regular, or professional, soldier is one who joins the military as a career. In contrast, conscripts are required by law to serve 
full-time for a specified period. Volunteers serve on a part-time basis. However, by the 1960s, the British had a different view 
of their military involvement in Asia. Although Britain saw 
the importance of maintaining its military presence in the 
region, it could no longer afford the large amount of money
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 143) ---
and resources to maintain this military commitment. It 
needed to focus on rebuilding its economy at home. Thus, 
the British government announced in 1967 that it would 
withdraw its defence forces from Singapore. By 1971, the 
majority of British forces had left, and the withdrawal was 
completed in 1976. 
The announcement of the withdrawal added to the 
defence challenges facing a newly independent Singapore. 
It would be left practically undefended. In addition, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 143) ---
British bases generated employment for many locals who 
provided goods and services to the British military. You 
will learn more about how the withdrawal of British forces 
worsened unemployment in Singapore in Chapter 10.
At the point of independence, Singapore had only two 
battalions of regular3 infantry of 50 officers and about  
1,000 men each. This was hardly enough to defend 
Singapore against external threats. The British had 
failed to defend against the Japanese invasion in 1942
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 143) ---
with approximately 90,000 men. About 50,000 British 
servicemen had been stationed in the region to defend 
against the threat from Indonesia during Konfrontasi. How 
could Singapore hope to cope with only 2,000 men? Dr Goh Keng Swee (third from left) reviewing a sea parade of 16 Royal Navy 
warships, 31 October 1971
 Headline in The Straits Times announcing Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew’s 
meeting with British Prime Minister Harold Wilson to discuss the withdrawal of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 143) ---
British troops from Singapore, 10 January 1968
134
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 144) ---
4 Deterrence refers to the creation and maintenance of a defence force that is powerful enough to convince potential enemies 
not to launch an attack, as it would either fail or be very costly. 
5 Diplomacy is the establishment and maintenance of official government relations between countries. Countries typically set 
up embassies in foreign capitals, where their diplomats would represent their interests.How Did Singapore Overcome  
Its Security Challenges?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 144) ---
Its Security Challenges?
Singapore approached its security challenges in two ways. The first was 
through deterrence4 by building a credible defence force that would make 
any potential enemies think twice before attacking. If deterrence failed 
and war broke out, this defence force also had to be capable of defeating 
the enemy swiftly and decisively. 
The second was through diplomacy,5 that is, by establishing and developing 
strong relationships with governments and defence forces around
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 144) ---
the world. In this way, Singapore could train with and learn from more 
advanced militaries elsewhere, have access to advanced technologies, and 
ensure that others would have a stake in preserving Singapore’s peace and 
stability. 
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
In Chapter 7, you were introduced to the concept of historical 
significance. To make judgements about the significance of events or 
developments, historians ask various questions. One question relates
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 144) ---
to the idea of change: did the event or development result in change 
that had, or still has, far-reaching consequences for society?
One of the topics you will encounter in this chapter is the introduction 
of National Service (NS) in 1967. This is considered a significant policy 
by those who lived through this period and by historians writing about 
Singapore’s history. Why is this so?
As you go through this chapter, use the following questions to help
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 144) ---
you understand why the introduction of NS was of significance to 
Singapore:
• How many people in Singapore were affected by this change?
• How much did their lives change?
• How long did this change last? Were many generations of 
Singaporeans affected by it? LEARN ON THE GO
Learn more about 
the historical 
significance of 
National Service @  
go.gov.sg/lshc901.
135
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 145) ---
Building a Defence Force 
Introducing National Service
You learnt in Chapter 7 that the British government introduced the National 
Service Ordinance in 1954, which allowed the government to conscript 
young men to serve in the military. The unpopularity of and resistance 
towards the 1954 National Service Ordinance highlighted the difficulty of 
introducing conscription in Singapore. As a result, this was never carried 
out while the British ruled Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 145) ---
out while the British ruled Singapore. 
Despite this, the Singapore government deemed that conscription 
was the only way Singapore could raise a credible defence force after 
independence. It therefore introduced National Service (NS) in 1967, which 
rapidly expanded the defence force, known as the Singapore Armed Forces 
(SAF). Thousands of men were conscripted for at least two years of full-
time NS. Upon completing NS, they would be liable for reservist duties,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 145) ---
which meant they would continue to receive occasional military training 
and take up arms in times of emergency. Read Source 2 to find out more.
Our army is to be engaged in the defence of the country and our people against external aggression. This task we are 
unable to do today by ourselves. It is no use pretending that without the British military presence in Singapore today, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 145) ---
island cannot be easily over-run by any neighbouring country within a radius of 1,000 miles, if any of them cared to do 
so. ... 
British military protection today has made quite a number of our citizens complacent about the need to conduct our own 
defence preparations. These people assume that this protection will be permanent. I regard it as the height of folly* to 
plan our future on this assumption … Nobody, neither we nor the British, can say when this† will be. It may be five, ten,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 145) ---
fifteen years; maybe more, maybe less. Whatever the time may be, it would be useless then to think about building up 
your defence forces. The time to do so is now.
– Adapted from a speech by Dr Goh Keng Swee to Parliament, 23 December 1965
* If something is the height of folly, it is extremely foolish.
† “This” refers to the British withdrawal of their defence forces. SOURCE 2
1. According to Source 2, why did Singapore’s leaders feel it was important to build up our defence forces?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 145) ---
Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew (third from left) at a sending-off dinner in 
Tanjong Pagar Community Centre for national servicemen from Tanjong Pagar 
constituency, 23 March 1968
 Families bidding farewell to their sons departing for NS at Pek Kio Community 
Centre, 3 September 1967
136
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 146) ---
Jek Y eun Thong (1930–2018) was 
born in Singapore. Before entering 
politics, he worked as a journalist 
for a Chinese newspaper. He served 
as Prime Minister Lee Kuan Y ew’s 
Political Secretary from 1959 to 1963 
and was responsible for writing his 
speeches in Chinese. He was elected to 
the Legislative Assembly in 1963 and 
served the Queenstown constituency 
until his retirement from politics in 
1988.
Jek took on various political 
appointments including Minister for
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 146) ---
appointments including Minister for 
Labour (1963–1968). He was one of 
the politicians who joined the PDF 
in 1966. He was appointed High 
Commissioner 
to the United 
Kingdom in 
1977, and 
Denmark in 
1978. In 1990, he 
was awarded the 
Order of Nila Utama 
(Second Class).
By the end of the 1970s, the SAF had grown into a sizeable defence force 
with an army, an air force and a navy. It was supplemented by the People’s 
Defence Force (PDF), which was formed entirely by part-time volunteers.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 146) ---
Ministers such as Dr Goh Keng Swee and Jek Yeun Thong, Members of 
Parliament and senior civil servants were among those who volunteered 
to join the PDF. Together, these forces gave Singapore a large pool of 
manpower to meet its defence needs.
 First batch of national servicemen taking the Oath 
of Allegiance, August 1967
 Female officers registering the first batch of 
national servicemen, March 1967 Recruit undergoing medical examination,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 146) ---
March 1967 Defence Minister Dr Goh Keng Swee (centre) inspecting the PDF volunteers, with Labour Minister Jek Yeun 
Thong on the extreme left, 29 November 1966Who was  
JEK YEUN THONG?
?
137
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 147) ---
At first, NS was received with some anxiety and uncertainty by many young 
men and their families. Men, especially those from less well-to-do families, 
were expected to find a job quickly upon leaving school and contribute 
to the household income. But with NS, their entry into the workforce 
would be delayed and their families would lose the income they could 
have earned. Read the following sources to find out more.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 147) ---
I have to be honest – I tried all tricks and ways to get out [of National Service], even begging on my knees. Because I knew 
if I went in and served National Service, I would get $60. That was a problem [as] there would be a drastic change in [my]
remuneration [as a construction site supervisor compared to the allowance I would get]. …
I started working at a young age … to help my family live better. … [I] was unsure if [my] family could manage financially 
without [my] contribution. …
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 147) ---
without [my] contribution. …
I knew that I could not escape from NS, so I was ready to just get on with it. It was a very sad moment for me actually. 
In the three-tonner [army truck], we NS boys were trying to talk to each other, trying to forget. And as the three-tonner 
moved off, … it became clear to me that I was entering a new era, and I needed to do something, rather than get worried. …
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 147) ---
When I pick up my weapon, I know it is for my family. Similarly, every one of us, when we pick up our weapons, it’s for 
everyone in our families. And ultimately it’s for the nation.
– Adapted from an account by Gungadaran, a construction site supervisor before he enlisted into NS in 1969.  
He eventually went on to serve a long career with the SAF. SOURCE 3
“So why National Service?” This is a routine question. If you have NS, [you] are no longer easy meat, no longer walkovers.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 147) ---
It is also an indirect show of force. To each his own, but to us, it is just practising our ability to defend our country’s 
sovereignty. It makes me feel proud. 
– Adapted from an account by Derrick Yeo, who enlisted in 1977, published in 2007SOURCE 4
I honestly feel that when we started NS, the threat to the country’s security was imminent. I saw Singapore as a growing 
nation and I felt that NS was very necessary. I did not have a problem with NS at all, even if it disrupted my studies or
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 147) ---
affected my entry into the job market later. 
– Adapted from an account by Dr Lionel Lee, who enlisted in 1971.  
He went on to become an army medical officer in the SAF in 1976.SOURCE 5
1. According to Sources 3, 4 and 5, what were some of the feelings of the young men who were called up for NS? Why 
did they feel this way?
138
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 148) ---
Furthermore, life in the military was unfamiliar to the majority of 
Singaporeans. Before NS was introduced, only a small number had 
experienced military life as regulars or as part-time volunteers with the 
colonial forces. Among them was Winston Choo, who became Singapore’s 
first Chief of Defence Force. 
For many of the conscripted men, NS was a big change and they had to 
adapt to the disciplined lifestyle of the military. Training was physically
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 148) ---
tough, and they had to manage their anxieties being away from their 
homes and families. In turn, many families were anxious about the well-
being of their sons when they were conscripted into the SAF.
 Soldiers practising how to safely evacuate an injured 
teammate, 1970s Soldiers getting ready for inspection during a field 
camp, 1960sWinston Choo (b. 1941) was born 
in Singapore. He enlisted in the 
Singapore Military Forces in 1959 
and was commissioned as Second
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 148) ---
and was commissioned as Second 
Lieutenant in 1961. His first overseas 
military stint occurred during 
Konfrontasi when he was deployed to 
the land border between Malaysia and 
Indonesia from 1963 to 1964. 
Choo became the first professional 
soldier to attain the rank of Major-
General and later Lieutenant-General. 
He became the first Chief of Defence 
Force in 1990 and retired from the 
SAF in 1992. After that, Choo took 
on diplomatic appointments such as 
Singapore’s High 
Commissioner
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 148) ---
Singapore’s High 
Commissioner 
to Australia and 
Fiji. In 2009, he 
was awarded the 
Public Service Star 
for his work at 
the Ministry 
of Foreign 
Affairs.
Who was  
WINSTON CHOO?
?
139
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 149) ---
The first generation of national servicemen stepped up to the task of 
defending Singapore despite having to make sacrifices. They knew their 
country faced genuine threats to its defence and security.
Because of NS, Singapore today has a sizeable force that can be mobilised 
to defend the country. National servicemen form the bulk of the SAF’s 
fighting force, contributing to Singapore’s peace and stability. NS, as the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 149) ---
foundation of Singapore’s national defence, remains critical to Singapore’s 
continued survival and success. It also creates a common experience, 
bringing together people of different races, religions and backgrounds.
Establishing a Home-Grown Defence Industry 
With NS, Singapore now had the manpower to defend itself – but how 
would it equip the men? Soldiers need a whole range of equipment to 
train and fight wars, from basic items such as uniforms and boots, to
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 149) ---
sophisticated weapons such as tanks and airplanes. 
Even though the SAF had inherited equipment from the British, it was 
mostly obsolete and inadequate for the growing demands of the SAF. 
Over time, it acquired equipment from other countries, such as the United 
States and France. However, Singapore was aware that relying on foreign 
countries for all its military equipment was a potential weakness.Women have played a role in the SAF 
since its earliest days. Some served as
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 149) ---
since its earliest days. Some served as 
regular personnel, while many others 
volunteered as part-time military 
personnel. Initially taking on supply, 
clerical and signalling roles, women in 
the SAF can now serve in roles such as 
tank commanders and fighter pilots. 
Today, there are more than 1,500 
women serving as regular personnel in 
the SAF.
Women also serve as volunteers in the 
SAF Volunteer Corps that started in 
2015.DID YOU KNOW?
 Female SAF personnel training with pistols, 
1966
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 149) ---
1966
Why was it a potential 
weakness for Singapore to 
rely on foreign countries for all 
its military equipment?
Think!
 Soldiers eating combat rations during a field camp, 1970s. Combat rations are pre-packaged meals usually 
eaten by soldiers during extended military exercises.
140
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 150) ---
Thus, Defence Minister Dr Goh Keng Swee decided to 
develop Singapore’s defence industry to provide the SAF 
with locally made equipment and supplies. This would 
enable the SAF to continue operating even if foreign 
sources were cut off. In 1967, the Chartered Industries of 
Singapore (CIS) was established to produce ammunition 
and weapons for the SAF. One of the earliest weapons 
it supplied was the M16S1 rifle, which was an American 
design but produced in Singapore and issued to almost
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 150) ---
every soldier. Singapore also trained defence engineers 
and scientists who designed and created new technology 
that was suitable for Singapore’s defence needs.
 President Dr Benjamin Sheares (third from right) touring the CIS during a visit to 
Jurong Industrial Estate, 1971
 Female workers at a CIS factory producing small arms ammunition for the SAF, 
1970s
Dr Goh Keng Swee (1918–2010) was born in Melaka, 
Malaya. He worked in the colonial civil service and earned
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 150) ---
a scholarship to study at the London School of Economics 
in 1948. After his studies, he returned to Singapore to rejoin 
the colonial civil service. Despite his achievements in the 
colonial civil service, Dr Goh was fuelled by anti-colonial 
sentiments. Thus, he eventually resigned and joined the 
PA P.
During his time at the different ministries, Dr Goh dealt 
with various pressing problems. A far-sighted leader, he 
established the SAF under the Ministry of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 150) ---
established the SAF under the Ministry of 
Defence when he was Minister for Interior 
and Defence (1965–1967). Dr Goh has 
often been called the “economic architect” 
of Singapore’s success. For his contributions 
to the development of Singapore, he was 
awarded the Order of Temasek (First 
Class) in 1985.
Who was  
DR GOH KENG SWEE?
?
Dr Benjamin Henry Sheares (1907–1981) was born in 
Singapore. He was the second President of Singapore and
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 150) ---
served three presidential terms. Dr Sheares started his 
medical career in 1929 at the Sepoy Lines General Hospital 
(present-day Singapore General Hospital). He began his 
career in obstetrics and gynaecology in 1931 and was 
the first Singaporean doctor to specialise in this medical 
field. He was thus known as Singapore’s “father of modern 
obstetrics and gynaecology” .
Dr Sheares was the first local to be 
appointed professor of obstetrics and 
gynaecology at the University of Malaya
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 150) ---
gynaecology at the University of Malaya 
in Singapore. He also advocated family 
planning and served as president of the 
Family Planning Association between 
1960 and 1963. Local landmarks and 
buildings have been named after him. 
One prominent example is the 
Benjamin Sheares Bridge.
Who was  
BENJAMIN SHEARES?
?
141
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 151) ---
Strengthening Military Cooperation with Other Countries
To further strengthen its defence, Singapore built on its existing relations 
with Commonwealth countries such as Britain, Australia and Malaysia, and 
established new ties with countries such as the United States. This was 
essential as friendly relations with other countries would allow the SAF 
to buy equipment from them, and train with and learn from other more 
experienced armed forces.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 151) ---
experienced armed forces. 
In 1971, Singapore, Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and Britain established 
the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) which committed the five 
members to consult one another in the event of an armed attack on 
Singapore or Malaysia. These five countries shared a close history as parts 
of the former British Empire and members of the Commonwealth, and had 
common interests in the region. The FPDA has facilitated regular combined
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 151) ---
military exercises among the five countries and has provided a platform for 
them to enhance defence cooperation. The latter was particularly critical 
in the 1970s and 1980s, when various armed conflicts were raging across 
parts of Southeast Asia. Today, the FPDA remains a relevant and defensive 
arrangement that contributes to regional peace and stability.
The SAF has contributed to 
peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance 
and disaster relief efforts overseas.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 151) ---
and disaster relief efforts overseas. 
Its humanitarian aid efforts started 
in 1970 when a team of 47 was sent 
to East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) 
after the country was hit by a deadly 
cyclone.
Since then, the SAF has provided 
assistance to various countries affected 
by conflict or natural disasters, such 
as Cambodia, Iraq, Afghanistan and 
Indonesia.DID YOU KNOW?
 SAF personnel providing medical assistance 
to people in Banda Aceh, Indonesia, after the 
tsunami in December 2004
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 151) ---
tsunami in December 2004 
 Lieutenant Leo Tin Boon, pictured here in 1970 at Seletar 
Airbase. Leo was among the pioneer batch of Singaporean 
officer cadets sent to France to be trained as pilots. Officials attending the FPDA talks at the Ministry of 
National Development building, 7 January 1971
142
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 152) ---
Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew (in white jacket)  
and his wife, Madam Kwa Geok Choo (bottom left), 
at the Great Wall of China during a visit to China 
in 1976 President Yusof bin Ishak and his wife, Puan Noor 
Aishah, welcoming Governor-General of New Zealand 
Sir Bernard Fergusson and his wife, Lady Fergusson, 
to the Istana in Singapore, 24 October 1967Strengthening Relations with the World 
Establishing Diplomatic Relations with Other Countries
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 152) ---
Besides pursuing military cooperation, Singapore also developed 
diplomatic relations with countries around the world. This was important 
as it could not take for granted that other countries would recognise its 
independence. Without this recognition, hostile countries could claim 
that Singapore had no right to exist, and could threaten, coerce and even 
invade it. Developing diplomatic relations would ensure that Singapore had
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 152) ---
friends that recognised its independence and had an interest in keeping it 
safe and secure.
Growing Bilateral Relationships 
At the point of independence, Singapore already had close ties with many 
Commonwealth countries, such as Australia, Britain and Malaysia. Now it 
needed to establish new relationships with other influential countries in the 
region and the world. The relationship between two individual countries is
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 152) ---
known as bilateral relations. Singapore built good relations with the United 
States, one of the most economically and militarily important countries 
with an interest in Asia. Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew made his first visit to 
China in 1976, beginning a process of engagement with Chinese leaders as 
China’s ties with Southeast Asia were expanding. 
At the same time, Singapore needed to cultivate friendships with as many
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 152) ---
countries as possible, even those that did not have direct interests in the 
region, or were located far away. These included countries in all parts of 
the world, regardless of their stance in the Cold War.
143
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 153) ---
Singapore also sought to improve ties with countries it had tensions with, 
such as Indonesia. Earlier you learnt about Indonesia’s policy of Konfrontasi 
and how bilateral ties were further strained after Singapore executed 
the Indonesian soldiers who had carried out the bombing of MacDonald 
House in 1968. Tensions between both countries eased only in 1973 when 
Prime Minister Lee visited Jakarta and scattered flowers on the graves of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 153) ---
the two soldiers, allowing both countries to move on from the incident. 
LEARN ON THE GO
Learn more about 
how Singapore 
cultivated stronger 
relationships with 
countries around  
the world @  
go.gov.sg/lshc902 .
 Artist’s impression of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew scattering flowers on the graves of the executed 
Indonesian soldiers during a visit to Jakarta, 1973
144
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 154) ---
UN logo  ASEAN logoJoining International and Regional Organisations
In addition, it was important for Singapore to join international organisations 
that would recognise its existence as an independent country. Membership 
in these organisations would also allow Singapore to participate actively 
in international and regional matters, and have its voice heard by the 
world. Singapore became the 117th member of the United Nations (UN) on
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 154) ---
21 September 1965, just over a month after separation from Malaysia. The 
UN is an international organisation that tries to get all countries to work 
together in maintaining peace and dealing with international problems.
In 1967, Singapore became a founding member of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN): a regional organisation formed to 
prevent the spread of communism during the Cold War and to promote 
economic growth, social progress and cultural development in the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 154) ---
Southeast Asian region through multilateral6 cooperation. For instance, 
ASEAN has introduced measures to increase trade among its members. 
It also aims to maintain peace and stability among member states and 
external partners. For example, when Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978, 
ASEAN worked with the UN and major countries like the United States 
and China to get Vietnam to withdraw its forces.
What are other benefits  
of building relationships 
with individual countries
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 154) ---
with individual countries 
or joining international 
organisations?
Think!
 Founding members of ASEAN in Bangkok, Thailand, 1967. From left: Foreign Ministers Thanat Khoman of 
Thailand, Narciso R. Ramos of the Philippines, S. Rajaratnam of Singapore, Tun Abdul Razak of Malaysia and 
Adam Malik of Indonesia.
6 Multilateral means involving several countries or groups.
Sinnathamby Rajaratnam (1915–2006), 
better known as S. Rajaratnam, was 
born in Sri Lanka. He moved to Malaya
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 154) ---
born in Sri Lanka. He moved to Malaya 
at a young age and furthered his studies 
in Singapore. While pursuing law at 
King’s College London, he developed 
an interest in politics. He became a 
journalist and wrote articles which 
openly opposed British colonial rule. 
This caught the attention of other 
founding members of the PAP , who 
approached him to co-form the PAP  
in 1954. 
In 1959, Rajaratnam was elected 
as the representative for Kampong 
Glam constituency in the Legislative
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 154) ---
Glam constituency in the Legislative 
Assembly and was appointed as the 
Minister for Culture. After Singapore’s 
independence, he became the first 
Foreign Minister and established 
Singapore’s status in the international 
community. He played a prominent 
role in the drafting of the National 
Pledge, which reflects his firm belief in 
multiracialism and unity 
among Singaporeans. 
For his contributions 
to Singapore, he was 
awarded the Order 
of Temasek (First 
Class) in 1990.Who was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 154) ---
of Temasek (First 
Class) in 1990.Who was  
S. RAJARATNAM?
?
145
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 155) ---
Conclusion
 SAF soldiers marching in front of the National 
Theatre (building in the background, demolished  
in 1986) at River Valley on National Day, 1968After independence in 1965, Singapore faced various security challenges 
from the region and internally. To overcome these challenges, Singapore 
adopted a two-pronged approach: deterrence and diplomacy. To deter 
attacks, it established a credible defence force. At the same time, it
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 155) ---
established diplomatic and military relations with countries around 
the world. This ensured that other countries had an interest in keeping 
Singapore safe and secure.
Now that you have seen how Singapore took steps to safeguard its peace 
and security, find out how the government developed other important 
areas such as the economy, education and housing in the next chapter.
146
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 156) ---
LEARN A SKILL: EXPLAINING THE CAUSES OF HISTORICAL EVENTS
In Chapter 5, you learnt that in order to fully understand how a historical event came about, historians have 
to examine the possible causes from different angles. It is also useful for historians to look at how different 
causes of a historical event might have interacted with one another.
Let us think about the ways in which an event can be explained by different causes. The following diagram
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 156) ---
tells you more about the different types of causes.
LEARN ON THE GO
Further enhance your 
powers of historical 
explanation @  
go.gov.sg/lshc903.
The cause that is often long-term in nature and  
develops over many years.Underlying Cause
The cause that contributes to, or influences,  
the event in more indirect ways.Contributory Cause
The cause that directly results in, or triggers,  
the event. It occurs just before the event.Trigger/Immediate Cause
Historical 
Event
147
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 156) ---
Historical 
Event
147
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 157) ---
These are some possible causes of Alphonse’s death.
Type of Cause
Underlying CauseAlphonse’s poor health meant that he was unable to carry a heavy weight over 
long distances. Alphonse’s uncaring master, who forced him to constantly carry 
heavy bags of grain, aggravated his poor health condition and he gradually 
became weaker and frailer.
Contributory CauseRemember those customers who bought the grain which Alphonse carried? They
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 157) ---
contributed to Alphonse’s death since it was their demand for grain that led 
Alphonse’s master to make the camel carry all those heavy bags of grain over 
long distances to the market.
Trigger/Immediate CauseIt was the final piece of straw that made the weight on Alphonse unbearable. This 
caused the already weakened camel to collapse.Explanation 
Contributory:  
Heavy bags of grain 
bought by customers
Underlying:  
Alphonse’s 
poor health
Trigger:  
Final piece of straw
Event:  
Alphonse’s
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 157) ---
Final piece of straw
Event:  
Alphonse’s 
deathRead the following story about a camel called Alphonse and think about the possible causes of Alphonse’s death.
Alphonse was a camel who had a cruel and uncaring master. Alphonse was born with severe back 
problems. Despite that, his master would still load heavy bags of grain onto Alphonse. Poor Alphonse 
would transport them over a long and difficult route to a market where these bags of grain would be
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 157) ---
bought by customers. Under the strain of these journeys, Alphonse’s health gradually suffered. One day, 
Alphonse was once again burdened with several heavy bags of grain. When a tiny straw accidentally 
landed on top of these bags, the weight was finally too much for Alphonse – he collapsed and died.
148
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 158) ---
Now, can you try explaining what led to the introduction of NS in 1967? Some possible causes are provided 
below.
Complete the following table based on what you have read in the chapter using these causes. An example 
has been done for you.
Cause Type of Cause Explanation
Need to safeguard 
independenceUnderlying CauseAfter independence, Singapore had only two 
battalions of regular infantry soldiers. This was hardly 
enough to defend the newly independent country
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 158) ---
enough to defend the newly independent country 
against external threats. Furthermore, Singapore 
faced security challenges from the region in the form 
of Konfrontasi and the Vietnam War. There was thus 
a vital need to build a strong and credible defence 
force to safeguard Singapore’s independence. 
Therefore, this was the underlying cause for the 
introduction of NS in 1967.
Contributory Cause
Trigger/ 
Immediate CauseBritish military
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 158) ---
Trigger/ 
Immediate CauseBritish military  
withdrawal from SingaporeVietnam War KonfrontasiTerrorism by 
communistsNeed to safeguard 
independence
149
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 159) ---
In this chapter, you looked at the security challenges Singapore faced after independence and how it 
overcame them. Complete the graphic organiser below to summarise what you have learnt. An example 
has been done for you. LET’S REVIEW
What Security Challenges Did Singapore Face?
Konfrontasi posed a serious 
security challenge to Singapore. 
As many as 42 bombings were 
carried out in Singapore during 
the period of Konfrontasi. Such 
incidents threatened the internal
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 159) ---
incidents threatened the internal 
security of Singapore and 
people’s daily lives were affected.
How Did Singapore Overcome These Challenges?
Diplomacy
Deterrence
150
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 160) ---
Singapore’s diplomats, as official representatives to other countries, were responsible for building 
relationships with these countries. In doing so, they played an important role in defending and promoting 
the nation’s interests during the post-independence years. 
Read the sources below to find out more about Singapore’s approach to diplomacy in the early years. How did Singapore’s early diplomats help to defend  
and promote Singapore’s interests?CASE INVESTIGATION
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 160) ---
I [was present to record the discussions] when [our leaders] met many important foreign leaders … in Singapore. Through 
these conversations, I realised that our leaders were alerting foreign governments … of our situation and the [challenges] 
confronting Singapore’s … security and survival. … They were getting friendly nations to understand our situation and 
hopefully maintain a continuing interest in Singapore. ... From that experience, I was better able to grasp and handle …
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 160) ---
many politically sensitive matters that needed addressing in the Ministry’s day-to-day work. 
– Adapted from an account by former President S. R. Nathan of his early years  
in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, published in 2005
While each potential foreign mission* was carefully [considered by Singapore’s diplomats], the initial choices were 
relatively obvious. ... Priority was given to Britain, Australia and New Zealand. Active partners in the Commonwealth and
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 160) ---
among the first countries to recognise independent Singapore, they also maintained military forces in the region. Equally 
important were missions to key non-aligned states† such as India, Egypt and Cambodia, which would ensure broad-based 
support. Economic considerations, at least in part, underscored the need for missions in Washington, Tokyo and Bangkok. 
– An account of the establishment of diplomatic missions  
in the early years of Singapore’s independence, published in 2005
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 160) ---
* A mission refers to a facility used by diplomats working in a foreign country, e.g., an embassy or a consulate. 
† Non-aligned states were those that chose to remain neutral and not align themselves with either the United States or the Soviet 
Union during the Cold War.SOURCE A
SOURCE B
151
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 161) ---
My first overseas posting was to Moscow … in December 1971 to assist Mr P. S. Raman, our Ambassador to the Soviet 
Union. It was hard to set up a mission from scratch, with many obstacles such as not knowing the language and local 
customs. It was really sink or swim, but we learnt from our setbacks.
I enjoyed showing people what Singapore was about, what we stood for. Even in those days, people could see that we
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 161) ---
were different. We were from a tiny country, still very young, with many different races working together, and all proud 
to be Singaporeans.
– An account by Phang Tai Chee, who joined  
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1970, published in 2015
I would be going to the biggest and closest neighbour, the largest country in the Southeast Asian region … which [could] 
do a great deal of harm to Singapore if relations between the two countries were bad. Very few people in Singapore knew
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 161) ---
much about Indonesia. It would be an advantage for Singapore and for myself if I could go there to understand the country 
and people better.  
– Adapted from an account by Lee Khoon Choy,  
Singapore’s first ambassador to Indonesia, published in 1993 SOURCE C
SOURCE D
1. Read Source A. According to the source, what did Singapore’s leaders and diplomats try to communicate 
to foreign leaders about Singapore’s situation after its independence?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 161) ---
2. Read Source B. What were the different reasons given in the source for building relations with other 
countries? 
3. Read Source C. Based on Lee Khoon Choy’s account, why was it important to maintain good relations 
with the larger neighbouring countries?
4. Read Source D. As mentioned in this source, what were some problems caused by the language barrier 
and cultural differences? Why do you think it was important for Singapore’s diplomats to “[show] what
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 161) ---
Singapore was about, what we stood for”?INVESTIGATE!
152
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 162) ---
How did Singapore’s early diplomats help to defend and promote Singapore’s interests? Complete the 
following table based on the sources. An example has been done for you.REPORT!
How did Singapore’s early diplomats help to defend and promote Singapore’s interests?
What Were the Different  
Approaches Adopted by the Diplomats?Examples from Sources 
Communicating Singapore’s concerns and  
interests to other countriesSource A: “our leaders were alerting foreign
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 162) ---
governments ... of our situation and the [challenges] 
confronting Singapore’s ... security and survival.” 
 
153
HOW DID SINGAPORE SAFEGUARD ITS INDEPENDENCE AFTER 1965?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 164) ---
155
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?In Chapter 9, you learnt about the security challenges that put Singapore’s 
future as an independent nation-state in doubt. Apart from that, 
Singapore’s survival was also threatened by other challenges that needed 
urgent attention during its early post-independence years.
To address these challenges, the government built upon efforts that had 
been started by the colonial government. As a result, life in Singapore had
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 164) ---
changed in many ways by the end of the 1970s. 
In this chapter, you will learn about the measures taken to deal with 
challenges to Singapore’s economy, national identity and society. You will 
also learn about the impact these challenges had on the lives of the people 
and how they responded to the changes that took place.CHAPTER  
10
To What Extent Did People’s Lives 
Change After Independence?
You will learn:
• What economic and social 
challenges Singapore faced
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 164) ---
challenges Singapore faced 
after it gained independence 
in 1965
• How Singapore overcame 
these challenges
• How people’s lives had 
changed by the end of the 
1970sChapter at a Glance
 Central Business District, 1977. The early stages  
of reclamation work on Marina South (site of 
present-day Marina Bay Sands) can be seen in  
the foreground.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 165) ---
Beyond Singapore In Singapore
 Flag-raising ceremony, 
30 August 1966  HDB flats in Queenstown, 1962  Identity card registration 
at one of the registration 
centres, 1966The British announce the withdrawal of 
their defence forces from Asia, including 
Singapore. They later confirm that 
withdrawal would be completed by 1971.
Singapore attains 
full internal  
self-government.The Housing & 
Development Board 
(HDB) is established.
Singapore attains 
independence.The Economic
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 165) ---
Singapore attains 
independence.The Economic 
Development Board 
(EDB) is established.Registration for Singapore 
identity cards begins.
The National Pledge  
is introduced. Daily  
flag-raising, flag-lowering  
and pledge-taking ceremonies 
are introduced in schools.The State Flag, State 
Crest and State National 
Anthem are introduced. Headline in The Straits 
Times, 17 January 1968
1959 1961 1960 1966 1965 1967
156
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)Timeline
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 166) ---
Jurong Town Hall, the headquarters 
of the JTC, officially opened in 1975 Newspaper in the United States 
announcing gas rationing system, 
January 1974. In the background,  
a sign at a petrol station states that 
no gasoline is available. (“Gas” and 
“gasoline” refer to petrol.)
 Jurong Town Hawker Centre, 1975The 1973 oil crisis starts, affecting 
economies around the world, 
including that of Singapore.
The Jurong Town Corporation 
(JTC) is established.Plans are announced
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 166) ---
(JTC) is established.Plans are announced 
for all hawkers to be 
relocated from the 
streets to hawker centres.The Goh Report is 
released, suggesting 
ways for Singapore’s 
education system to 
better cater to the 
needs of all students.
The majority of British 
forces withdraw from 
Singapore.
1968 1970 1979 1971 1973
157
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 167) ---
How Did Singapore Address  
Its Economic Challenges?
As you learnt in Chapter 8, many of the economic benefits Singapore 
expected from the merger did not materialise due to disagreements 
between the Singapore government and the Malaysian federal government. 
With the separation from Malaysia, Singapore found itself having to deal 
with significant economic challenges as a newly independent nation-state.
Let us find out more about these challenges and the steps taken to 
overcome them.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 167) ---
overcome them.
Economic Vulnerability
Limited Access to the Malaysian Hinterland
After Singapore gained independence, Malaysia remained its main trading 
partner. However, without a common market and direct access to the 
Malaysian hinterland, trade between the two countries was limited. Read 
the illustrated story below to learn more. 
Malaysia also reduced the volume of its exports, 
such as raw tin and rubber, to Singapore. 
Previously, these were often stored or processed
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 167) ---
Previously, these were often stored or processed 
in Singapore before being re-exported 
worldwide. But Malaysia now sought to process 
and export them directly from its own ports.These 
shoes from 
Singapore are so  
expensive  
now!Let’s buy 
these instead. 
They are made here 
in Malaysia and are 
cheaper too!
To limit competition to its own industries, 
Malaysia increased tariffs on Singapore’s exports, 
thus raising their prices. This lowered the demand
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 167) ---
for Singapore-made goods in Malaysia, as 
Malaysian-made goods became more affordable 
in comparison.Impact of LIMITED TRADE WITH MALAYSIAImpact of LIMITED TRADE WITH MALAYSIA
after Singapore’s independenceafter Singapore’s independence
In Malaysia Meanwhile, in Singapore …Maybe 
I should switch 
to another industry! My 
Malaysian supplier now 
processes his raw rubber 
materials himself instead of 
sending it here to be 
processed.
158
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 167) ---
sending it here to be 
processed.
158
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
Threat of Unemployment
Another economic concern was the need to provide sufficient jobs to 
cater to Singapore’s rapidly growing population. In 1965, there were already 
more than 70,000 unemployed persons out of a total labour force1 of over 
700,000. Additionally, there were a large number of young people about 
to finish their schooling who would soon be joining the labour force. If no 
jobs were available to them, Singapore’s unemployment problem would 
grow even more severe.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
grow even more severe.
To make matters worse, the entrepôt trade, which had been the lifeline 
of Singapore’s economy for more than a century, had been declining since 
World War II. This was amid growing competition from other ports in the 
region. Thus, its importance as a source of job creation was diminishing. 
Britain’s announcement in 1967 of the closure of its military bases added 
to the problems affecting Singapore’s economy. These bases were a major
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
source of employment for Singaporeans, with the livelihoods of over 
40,000 people dependent on supplying goods and services to British 
servicemen stationed here.
To address the challenges of unemployment and the declining entrepôt 
trade, the government had to diversify the economy. This meant finding 
new and varied sources of economic growth instead of being overly 
dependent on any one source. This would make it more likely for the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
economy to grow steadily and ensure there were sufficient jobs available 
for the people. 
Economic Diversification
Development of Export-Oriented Industrialisation
Even before merger and independence, the government believed  
industrialisation2 was key to diversifying Singapore’s economy. In 1961, 
Finance Minister Dr Goh Keng Swee announced the establishment 
of the Economic Development Board (EDB). Its task was to promote  
industrial development in Singapore, for example, by attracting
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
multinational corporations (MNCs)3 to set up factories here. Goods 
produced in these factories were meant to be sold mainly in Singapore 
and the Malaysian hinterland. However, this became impractical after 
independence. Thus, Singapore adopted an export-oriented economic 
policy. The majority of goods produced would instead be exported 
worldwide. 
1 A labour force consists of all the people in a country who are either working or looking for work. Generally, the higher the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
percentage of a country’s labour force who are working, the better its economy is considered to be doing.
2 Industrialisation is the process of developing manufacturing in an economy on a large scale, usually through the adoption of 
technology and machinery.
3 An MNC is a company that operates in more than one country.
 Shops in Changi Village, 1972. These shops were 
set up to cater to the British forces stationed 
nearby and suffered from poor business following 
the British pull-out.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
the British pull-out.
Dr Albert Winsemius, a Dutch 
economist, played a key role in 
Singapore’s early industrialisation 
efforts. He headed a UN study that 
recommended an industrialisation 
programme for Singapore, and later 
served as the chief economic adviser 
to the Singapore government from 
1961 to 1984. Following his passing in 
1996, Lee Kuan Y ew wrote in a letter of 
condolence to Dr Winsemius’ family 
that “Singapore and [Lee] …  
are indebted to  
[Dr Winsemius] for
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 168) ---
are indebted to  
[Dr Winsemius] for 
the time, energy and 
development he 
gave to Singapore. ”DID YOU KNOW?
 Dr Albert 
Winsemius
159
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 169) ---
BE A YOUNG HISTORIAN: CHANGE AND CONTINUITY 
Amy Lim
Amy Lim
In Chapter 3, you learnt how historians use the terms “change” and 
“continuity” to describe or compare developments over time. In 
your study of Singapore’s history, you will have seen that while many 
things changed, others remained the same. For example, although 
Singapore’s rulers changed several times over the centuries, external 
developments continued to influence Singapore regardless of who 
the rulers were.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 169) ---
the rulers were.
Additionally, the pace at which change happens may not be constant. 
It may accelerate or slow down significantly as a result of certain 
events or developments.
One such event is Singapore gaining independence on 9 August 
1965. While some changes had taken place prior to independence, 
this day marked the start of a period of accelerated change in areas 
such as economic and social development. As you continue to learn
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 169) ---
about the developments in post-independence Singapore, bear the 
following questions in mind:
• In what ways did changes take place?
– How quickly did these changes take place?
– How great were the changes?
– How did people react to the changes?
• In what ways was there continuity?
• In what ways did change and continuity take place at the same time?Hundreds of MNCs from countries such as the Netherlands, Britain, Japan 
and the United States set up operations in Singapore. The MNCs included
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 169) ---
Shell, Seiko and Hewlett-Packard. Refer to Figure 10.1 on the next page to 
find out what attracted the MNCs to Singapore and what effects they had 
on the economy.
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew at the opening of a 
factory in Marsiling set up by Seiko to manufacture 
watch components, 1976
 Employees at Hewlett-Packard’s plant manufacturing 
electronic equipment at Depot Road, 1979
 Shell oil refinery on Pulau Bukom, 1970s
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more  
about how the  
pace of change can
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 169) ---
about how the  
pace of change can 
vary over time @  
go.gov.sg/lshc1001.
160
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 170) ---
How Singapore Benefitted from MNCs Setting Up Operations Here
• Employment for thousands of people
• Valuable technical training and work experience for the local workforce, which helped to build up local 
expertise that would eventually fill job vacancies previously filled by foreigners
• Greater access to modern technology to help keep Singapore competitive globally
• Increased exports of locally manufactured goods to more overseas markets
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 170) ---
Figure 10.1: Why MNCs were attracted to Singapore and their importance to the economy
To lower costs and maximise profitsLower tax rates, which made it more 
financially attractive for MNCs to set up 
operations in new industries in Singapore
To operate in a safe and secure 
environmentSafe and secure environment due to 
low crime rates, strengthened defence 
capabilities and diplomatic relations with 
countries across the region and world
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 170) ---
countries across the region and world
To have a reliable supply of labourLarge, young and growing labour force 
supported by trade unions that partnered 
the government and company bosses to 
achieve higher productivity and stronger 
economic growth
To have a suitable location for their 
factories, with facilities and space  
available for future expansionSizeable amount of land set aside for 
the development of industrial estates 
equipped with adequate facilities for
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 170) ---
equipped with adequate facilities for 
factories and space for their future 
expansion
What Singapore Provided
 What MNCs Sought
161
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 171) ---
In 1961, the EDB transformed almost 70 square kilometres of land in Jurong 
into Singapore’s first industrial estate. Following this, plots of land across 
the country were set aside for development into industrial estates (see 
Map 10.1 below).
As Singapore grew more industrialised, the task of managing industrial 
estates became more challenging. Thus, in 1968, the Jurong Town 
Corporation (JTC) was set up to take over the task of building and managing
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 171) ---
industrial estates. This allowed the EDB to focus on attracting foreign 
investment.
 Map 10.1: Map showing the location of JTC industrial estates in Singapore in 1976Legend
JTC Industrial EstatesJurongKranji/
Sungei 
KadutSenoko
Sembawang
Toa PayohLoyang
Kallang Basin
Tiong BahruRedhill
Telok Blangah
Southern IslandsAyer RajahSims AvenueNApart from industrial development, 
the JTC was also responsible for 
developing facilities to improve the 
quality of life of the people who
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 171) ---
quality of life of the people who 
worked and lived in the industrial 
estates. In Jurong, the JTC oversaw 
the development of places such as the 
Jurong Bird Park, Chinese Gardens, 
Japanese Gardens and even a drive-in 
cinema. DID YOU KNOW?
 Opening day of Jurong Drive-in cinema,  
14 July 1971
 EDB Chairman Hon Sui Sen (extreme left) briefing 
Indonesian Foreign Minister Adam Malik (second 
from left) on plans for Jurong Industrial Estate,  
19 March 1968
162
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 171) ---
19 March 1968
162
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 172) ---
4 GDP measures the total value of goods and services produced in a country in a year. The higher the annual percentage increase 
in GDP, the greater the economic growth.These efforts to diversify the economy paid off, as manufacturing activity 
in Singapore increased significantly (see Figure 10.2 for some of the key 
industries that developed in Singapore). Almost 150,000 jobs were created 
between 1967 and 1973 alone. By the early 1970s, unemployment was a
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 172) ---
thing of the past. In fact, there was a shortage of labour, such that foreign 
workers had to be recruited to fill jobs. Singapore’s economy, which had 
seemed vulnerable upon independence, grew remarkably. Up until 1973, 
its economic growth rates, measured in terms of gross domestic product 
(GDP),4 exceeded 10 per cent every year. Refer to Source 1 on page 166 to 
find out more.
Development of Infrastructure
To support the diversification of the economy, the government also
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 172) ---
developed the proper infrastructure in Singapore. This would not only 
help to attract MNCs and other foreign investors, but also facilitate the 
growth of Singapore’s manufacturing industries. See Figure 10.3 on the next 
two pages to learn what some of these developments were. Figure 10.2: Some key industries in SingaporeElectronics Petroleum Refining
Ship Building and Repair
 Garments and Textiles
Some of the 
Key Industries 
That Developed
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 172) ---
Some of the 
Key Industries 
That Developed 
in Singapore Factory workers assembling televisions in an electronics 
factory, late 1960s   
 Oil tanker undergoing repairs at Sembawang Shipyard, 1978 Oil refinery at Jurong Industrial Estate, 1966
 Workers at a textile factory, 1975
163
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 173) ---
To boost connectivity among industries and 
households, the telecommunications system 
was improved. The Singapore Telephone 
Board installed new telephones at a rapid 
pace. While it had taken 85 years to install 
the first 100,000 telephones, it took just 
five years from 1967 to 1972 to double the 
network size to 200,000.Telecommunications
Banking and financial services were 
expanded to meet the needs of MNCs and 
other companies in Singapore. For example,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 173) ---
other companies in Singapore. For example, 
the Development Bank of Singapore 
(DBS) was established in 1968 to finance 
industrialisation and other development 
projects. Many foreign banks also set up 
operations here.Banking and Finance
The Public Utilities Board (PUB) was set 
up in 1963. It was responsible for providing 
public utilities such as water, electricity 
and gas to industries and households. 
It continued its work after Singapore’s 
independence. This improved both the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 173) ---
independence. This improved both the 
operating conditions of industries and 
people’s living conditions. Public Utilities
 Figure 10.3: Development of infrastructure Telephone operators at work, 1970
 Newly built Pasir Panjang Power Station extension, 1965
 Newspaper headlines from the 1970s announcing the opening of branches of 
foreign banks in Singapore Newspaper headlines from the 1970s announcing the opening of branches of 
foreign banks in Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 173) ---
foreign banks in Singapore
Development of Singapore’s Infrastructure After Independence
 The Straits Times, 19 October 1976
 New Nation, 30 April 1974
 The Business Times, 28 June 1978
 The Straits Times, 16 October 1972
164
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 174) ---
Transport Facilities
 (Top image) Headline in the New Nation, 13 December 1972;  
(bottom image) Concorde aircraft at Paya Lebar Airport, 1972
 PSA container terminal at Keppel Harbour, 1972
 Thomson Road flyover, 1971
Paya Lebar Airport was expanded in the 
1960s and 1970s so it could handle more 
passenger and cargo traffic. However, there 
was insufficient space for future expansion. 
Thus, the government decided in 1975 to 
replace it with a larger airport. Changi
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 174) ---
replace it with a larger airport. Changi 
Airport was opened in 1981.Air Transport
The Port of Singapore Authority (PSA) was 
formed in 1964 to manage port operations. 
To cater to the rise in cargo traffic, it set 
up port facilities in Jurong, Sembawang, 
Tanjong Pagar and Pasir Panjang.Sea Transport
Roads were constructed to connect industrial 
areas to housing estates. An expressway 
system was built to reduce the time needed 
to travel around the island.Land Transport
165
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 174) ---
to travel around the island.Land Transport
165
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 175) ---
Impact of the 1973 Oil Crisis
Despite the government’s efforts, Singapore did not enjoy continuous 
economic progress, but remained vulnerable to developments beyond its 
shores due to its success being deeply tied to that of the global economy. 
In late 1973, a conflict in the Middle East, a major oil exporting region, 
caused a shortage in global oil supply and oil prices jumped by almost 
four times in less than three months. This had a significant impact on
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 175) ---
Singapore as it imported all its oil, which was needed for its economy to 
run smoothly. Refer to Figure 10.4 on the next page to learn more.
Several measures were implemented to help the people deal with the 
effects of the oil crisis. For example, the government took the lead in 
increasing workers’ wages to help them cope with inflation. While Singapore 
recovered by 1976, this crisis served as a reminder that its economy was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 175) ---
vulnerable to external developments beyond its control. Study Source 1 to 
see Singapore’s growth rate following independence.
– Graph showing Singapore’s economic growth rate in terms of GDP (1965–1979), adapted from World Bank dataSOURCE 1
06
28
410121416
1965 1967 1968 1969 1966 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979GDP growth rate (%)
Year
1. According to Source 1, how did the oil crisis of 1973 affect Singapore’s economy?
166
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 175) ---
166
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 176) ---
Figure 10.4: Impact of the increase in global oil prices on Singapore (1973–1976)
Increase in  
global oil prices
Increase in cost 
of producing and 
transporting goods
Decrease in  
demand for 
Singapore’s exports
Decrease in  
economic growth rate  
(see Source 1)
Increase in  
price of goodsIncrease in  
public transport fares
Increase in  
petrol and electricity 
prices in Singapore
Increase in  
cost of living 
167
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 177) ---
How Did Singapore Build  
a National Identity?
People in Singapore came from diverse ethnic, language, religious and 
economic backgrounds. Mostly, they did not see themselves as belonging 
to a country called Singapore. In order for the country to move forward 
and succeed following independence, the government had to build a sense 
of national identity among all its people.
Even before independence, the government had tried to build greater cohesion and a sense of belonging
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 177) ---
among the diverse population. This was challenging, as many tended to associate with those who shared 
their ethnicity, language or religion.
Furthermore, the education system inherited from the British was not conducive to fostering cohesion 
among the young. The majority of students went to schools where they were chiefly taught in their own 
vernacular languages, while a smaller number went to English-language schools. Hence, most students had
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 177) ---
limited opportunities to interact with those from different backgrounds.
With independence, it became even more critical to unite the people by fostering a stronger sense of 
belonging and identity among them as Singaporeans.The need for a SINGAPOREAN IDENTITYThe need for a SINGAPOREAN IDENTITY
168
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 178) ---
Building Social Cohesion and Sense of Belonging
Introduction and Evolution of Citizenship
In Chapter 7, you learnt about the introduction of Singapore citizenship 
with the Citizenship Ordinance of 1957. Refer to Figure 10.5 below to find 
out how the concept of being a Singaporean citizen evolved over the 
years, starting from 1957.
After Singapore became independent, the National Registration Act of 1965 
came into effect on 5 May 1966. All Singaporeans above 12 years old and
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 178) ---
those with existing identity cards issued under the Registration of Persons 
Ordinance 1955 were required to re-register. Singapore citizens  received a 
pink identity card, which served as a physical symbol of their identity as 
Singaporeans. It entitled them to the rights and privileges of citizenship, 
such as voting, priority in receiving employment opportunities over non-
citizens, and access to social services such as education and healthcare.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 178) ---
5 To renounce something is to formally reject it or give it up. Pink identity card for Singapore citizens
 Identity card registration at Raffles Institution (one 
of the registration centres), 1966
 Figure 10.5: Evolution of Singapore citizenshipSingapore citizenship was offered to all residents born in Singapore or the 
Federation of Malaya, British citizens who had lived in Singapore for two years 
and residents who had lived in the colony for at least a decade. Those who took up
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 178) ---
Singapore citizenship had to renounce5 allegiance to any foreign state. They would 
share a common identity as Singapore citizens, as well as common rights and 
responsibilities.
1957 
Citizenship 
Ordinance
All Singapore citizens were automatically recognised as citizens of the Federation  
of Malaysia.
1963 
Merger with 
Malaya
As Singapore and Malaysia were now two separate countries, Singapore citizens 
would not be allowed to keep Malaysian citizenship. Citizens of each country could no
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 178) ---
longer freely cross the border to work or visit their relatives without a passport.
Post-1965 
Independence
SPECIMEN
169
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 179) ---
Creation of National Symbols
In 1959, after Singapore attained full internal self-government, Deputy 
Prime Minister Dr Toh Chin Chye coordinated efforts to create the State 
Flag and the State Crest, and adopt the State National Anthem, “Majulah 
Singapura” (see page 76). During the years of merger, Singapore kept the 
first two state symbols but adopted the Malaysian National Anthem, 
“Negaraku” . When Singapore gained independence, the State Flag and
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 179) ---
“Majulah Singapura” were adopted as the National Flag and National 
Anthem respectively. 
Forging of National Identity in Schools
After independence, the National Pledge was introduced in schools to 
foster a greater sense of belonging and rootedness among students. It 
reflected the ideals for building a united Singapore. Originally written in 
English, the National Pledge was translated into Singapore’s three other 
official languages.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 179) ---
official languages. 
Daily flag-raising and flag-lowering ceremonies, accompanied by the singing 
of the National Anthem and the recitation of the pledge, were introduced 
in schools from August 1966. This practice still takes place in schools and 
at National Day observance ceremonies today. Read Source 2 on the next 
page to learn more about the introduction of the pledge-taking ceremony.Dr Toh Chin Chye (1921–2012) 
was born in Perak, Malaya. He was 
motivated to enter politics after
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 179) ---
motivated to enter politics after 
witnessing the injustices and lack of 
equality in colonial society and during 
the Japanese Occupation. 
When Dr Toh returned to Singapore 
in 1953 after obtaining a doctorate 
in Physiology at London’s National 
Institute for Medical Research, he 
engaged in regular political discussions 
with a group that met at Lee Kuan Y ew’s 
house at 38 Oxley Road. This group 
eventually became the People’s Action 
Party, and Dr Toh became its founding 
Chairman.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 179) ---
Party, and Dr Toh became its founding 
Chairman. 
In 1959, Dr Toh was elected as the 
representative for Rochore constituency 
in the Legislative Assembly. As Deputy 
Prime Minister (1959–1968), he played 
a key role in shaping the identity of 
Singapore’s people. Later on, he assumed 
other ministerial positions, including 
Health and Education. Dr Toh  
continued serving as a Member of 
Parliament (MP) until 
1988, when he retired 
from politics. He was 
awarded the Order
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 179) ---
from politics. He was 
awarded the Order 
of Nila Utama (First 
Class) in 1990, in 
recognition of his 
contributions to 
Singapore.
 Flag-raising ceremony, 30 August 1966Who was  
DR TOH CHIN CHYE?
?
170
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 180) ---
Many of [the students] would think [reciting the pledge was] unnecessary and they would never take it seriously ... [From] 
the way they used to stand[, you could tell] they were quite bored ... So we had to show them the seriousness of [reciting 
the pledge]. On rainy days, when we couldn’t meet at assembly, we had to do it in the classroom. We had to put up the flag 
near the blackboard, pinned it up there and everyone would stand in the classroom and say it. That was a good time for
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 180) ---
us to hear the pledge really being said [in] a smaller group and that [was] a time that we could correct them and [make 
them] see the seriousness of it.
– Adapted from a 2004 oral interview with Christabelle Alvis,  
a teacher when the pledge-taking ceremony was introduced in the 1960sSOURCE 2
1. According to Source 2, how did students respond to the introduction of pledge-taking in the 1960s?
2. Why do you think the teacher emphasised the importance of reciting the pledge?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 180) ---
In October 1965, a suggestion was 
made in the Ministry of Education 
to compose a pledge reflecting the 
ideals for building a united Singapore. 
Ong Pang Boon, the Minister for 
Education, supported the idea and 
worked with officers to draft the 
pledge. The draft was then revised 
by S. Rajaratnam, the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs, to emphasise the 
need to bridge the divide among the 
different races. The finalised National 
Pledge was introduced in 1966.
When pledge-taking was first
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 180) ---
When pledge-taking was first 
introduced, students recited the pledge 
with their right hands raised. The 
current way of reciting the pledge was 
only introduced in 1988. The clenched 
fist over the heart symbolises loyalty to 
the nation.DID YOU KNOW?
Observe the difference in the placement of the 
right hand during pledge-taking at the National 
Day Parades in 1986 (top image) and 1988 
(bottom image).
171
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 181) ---
LEARN A SKILL: ANALYSING SPEECHES
In your study of post-war Singapore, one type of source you have encountered is the speech. In delivering 
a speech, a speaker is typically aware of the profile of the audience and seeks to share his or her views 
in a manner that would appeal to them. The speaker may also wish to influence the audience’s views. In 
previous chapters, for example, you saw how members of political parties gave speeches during election
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 181) ---
campaigns to persuade the public to vote for them.
After Singapore attained full internal self-government, members of the PAP government often used public 
speeches to communicate their policies and the reasons behind them. These policies played a key role in 
shaping Singapore’s development from the self-government and merger years through to independence. 
Thus, it is important to learn to analyse speeches, as they can help you learn more about Singapore’s history.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 181) ---
When analysing a speech as a historical source, it is important to consider the following:
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew delivering his speech 
at a National Day celebration on 10 August 1966
1. Who was the speaker? What role or position did he or she hold?
2. Who were the audience? (This may not always be limited to the people physically present when the 
speech was given but may also include those who viewed, listened to or read the speech when it was 
broadcast or reported by the press.)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 181) ---
broadcast or reported by the press.)
3. (a) What was the context of the speech?
- What was the occasion at which the speech was given?
- What other events or developments were taking place immediately before or at the same time 
as this speech?
 (b) What was significant about this context?
4. What were the key points of the speech?
5. What was the speaker’s intention in giving this speech (e.g., in terms of how the audience would feel 
or act in response)?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 181) ---
or act in response)?
With these questions in mind, look at the excerpt on the next page. It is adapted from a speech delivered by 
Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew to residents of Queenstown at a National Day celebration on 10 August 1966.
172
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 182) ---
Now analyse the speech using the guiding questions. Suggested answers are provided on the next page.
1. Who was the speaker? What role or position did he or she hold?
2. Who were the audience?
3. (a) What was the context of the speech?
- What was the occasion at which the speech was given?
- What other events or developments were taking place immediately before or at the same time as this speech?
(b) What was significant about this context?
4. What were the key points of the speech?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 182) ---
4. What were the key points of the speech?
5. What was the speaker’s intention in giving this speech (e.g., in terms of how the audience would feel or act in response)?
It is the young that will determine what happens to this society. And it is we and what we do now that 
determines what they can be.
It depends on the education we give them; the training they receive; the values that they are taught – what 
is good, what is bad; what should be done; what should not be done …
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 182) ---
Seven years ago, ... we were building primary schools just to give the boys and girls a place in school. But 
we are now building secondary schools and no more primary schools because we have enough of them 
[primary schools]. ... [F]ortunately, the population is not increasing as rapidly as it used to. So, we improve! … 
[T]o every primary school and every secondary school we add a school hall, a school gymnasium. Because 
we must have a generation that is not only good at scoring on paper.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 182) ---
... And you have to throw up a whole generation capable of … leadership, conscious of its responsibilities, 
jealous of its rights, not allowing anyone to bully it and push it around, prepared to stand up and fight and 
die. That kind of a generation will endure till the end of time. And that is what we can do and will do.
173
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 183) ---
1. Who was the speaker? What role or position did he or she hold?
The speaker was the Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew.
2. Who were the audience?
The audience were the residents of Queenstown. The audience also included those who read, listened to or 
viewed press reports or broadcasts of the speech.
3. (a) What was the context of the speech?
- What was the occasion at which the speech was given?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 183) ---
- What other events or developments were taking place immediately before or at the same time as this speech?
This speech was given at a National Day celebration marking Singapore’s first year of independence.  
Singapore was still in the midst of overcoming the various challenges it faced with its independence.
(b) What was significant about this context?
This was an opportunity for Prime Minister Lee to remind the people that even as they celebrated Singapore’s
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 183) ---
independence, their help was needed to overcome the challenges that Singapore still faced.
4. What were the key points of the speech?
Education was important, and there was a need to improve education in Singapore so that a new generation 
of responsible leaders would emerge.
5. What was the speaker’s intention in giving this speech (e.g., in terms of how the audience would feel or act in response)?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 183) ---
He hoped to get their support for future government measures taken to improve the education system.
When you next encounter a speech as a historical source, it is important that you ask yourselves these 
questions. This will give you a clearer sense of its purpose and how it fits into the context of the historical 
period you are studying. Look at the images below of two prominent Singaporeans giving speeches. What 
was the context of these speeches?Suggested Answers
LEARN ON THE GO
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 183) ---
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
how to analyse a 
speech @  
go.gov.sg/lshc1002 .
 Foreign Affairs Minister S. Rajaratnam delivering a speech 
at the commissioning ceremony * of RSS Sovereignty, a 
Republic of Singapore Navy fast patrol boat, 1971
* At a commissioning ceremony, a new ship is officially 
placed in active duty. Finance Minister Hon Sui Sen speaking at the opening of 
the Singapore branch of Hitachi Consumer Products Pte 
Ltd, 1974
174
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 183) ---
Ltd, 1974
174
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 184) ---
How Did Singapore Address  
Its Social Challenges?
Aside from dealing with economic challenges and building a national 
identity, the government also tackled the social challenges that threatened 
the newly independent nation. In particular, the government took 
measures to improve housing, education and healthcare. These measures  
had a direct and significant impact on the lives of the people.
Providing Public Housing
As you learnt in Chapter 7, Singapore experienced rapid population growth
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 184) ---
and a shortage of affordable housing in the early post-war years. As a 
result, many lived in unhygienic and overcrowded conditions in kampongs 
and shophouses, which often lacked basic facilities such as running water, 
flush toilets and electricity. 
Furthermore, the SIT had made little progress in meeting the growing 
demand for low-cost housing (see Chapter 7, page 48). On average, the 
SIT was only able to construct one new flat for every 150 families per
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 184) ---
year. Urgent action was needed to improve the living conditions of the 
population.  Blocks of flats in Tanglin Halt in 1962. These were 
among the earliest generation of HDB flats, built to 
address the housing shortage.
 Shophouses along a street in Chinatown, c. 1970
175
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 185) ---
Evacuated Bukit Ho Swee residents looking at the fire destroying their homes, 25 May 1961
6 A squatter settlement is an area where people live that has not been approved for residential purposes by the authorities.Lim Kim San (1916–2006) was born 
in Singapore. At a very young age, he 
acquired business skills by helping 
his family’s businesses. In 1939, he 
graduated from Raffles College with a 
Diploma in Arts (Economics). 
In 1960, Lim was appointed Chairman
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 185) ---
In 1960, Lim was appointed Chairman 
of the HDB. He joined the PAP in 
1963, and was later elected MP for 
Cairnhill constituency. 
Lim held various ministerial 
positions during his political career, 
including National Development 
and Finance. He is, however, best 
remembered as “Mr HDB” because 
of his contributions in providing 
low-cost housing for the people in the 
1960s, and was awarded the Order of 
Temasek in 1962 for his achievements.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 185) ---
Temasek in 1962 for his achievements. 
He retired from politics in 1981.In 1960, the Housing & Development Board (HDB) was set up to take over 
the SIT’s task of providing housing for the population. Its immediate goal 
was to build blocks of flats as quickly as possible and at affordable prices. 
By the end of 1962, under the leadership of its first Chairman, Lim Kim San, 
the HDB had built more flats than the SIT had managed in its entire span
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 185) ---
of operation. By 1965, it had constructed 54,000 flats, enough to house 25 
per cent of Singapore’s population. 
The HDB’s resourcefulness was tested when a fire swept through the 
squatter settlement6 in Bukit Ho Swee on 25 May 1961. The fire left four 
dead and around 16,000 homeless. The very next day, Prime Minister Lee 
Kuan Yew announced plans to find new homes for the victims within a 
year. In less than a year, all who had lost their homes in the fire had found
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 185) ---
accommodation. Many were housed in low-cost emergency flats rapidly 
constructed by the HDB.
Who was  
LIM KIM SAN?
?
LEARN ON THE GO
Find out more about 
the experiences of 
new HDB residents in 
the 1960s @  
go.gov.sg/lshc1003.
176
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 186) ---
For most of the new HDB residents, the flats were a significant change 
from their previous homes. For the first time, they had access to amenities 
such as electricity, drinkable tap water, waste disposal services and toilet 
facilities in their own homes. They now lived in far greater comfort and 
security. The newly built estates were located in areas such as Queenstown 
and Toa Payoh, which were further from the city. This helped to reduce the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 186) ---
overcrowding in central areas such as Chinatown. However, not everyone 
responded positively to being rehoused. Read Source 3 to find out more.
Initially, those who moved into HDB flats could only rent them at  
a subsidised rate. However, Prime Minister Lee wanted to encourage 
people to own their homes, as he felt this would foster a greater sense of 
belonging and rootedness. Thus, the HDB home ownership scheme was 
launched in 1964, to allow families to purchase HDB flats.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 186) ---
Although many families [view being rehoused positively], there are those who find it hard to … adjust to the changed 
environment, and thus lag behind the others in attaining a new standard of living. … Some had been residing where they 
were since childhood, and felt much at home in the familiar atmosphere. However poor and dilapidated the house may 
have been, [they were] reluctant to leave. … Some are afraid to use the lifts, for they consider them to be crowded and
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 186) ---
dangerous, and prefer to use the stairs. Those who live on the 14th floor, for instance, would find it very tedious to use 
the stairs even as little as twice per day. As a result, many lock themselves up within their four walls, and greatly miss 
the carefree kampong life.
– Adapted from an article in local newspaper New Nation, titled “Adjusting to Highrise Living”, 15 July 1971SOURCE 3
1. According to Source 3, why did some residents have a negative view of being resettled in HDB flats?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 186) ---
How would home ownership 
help Singaporeans develop  
a sense of rootedness?
Think!
 Balloting ceremony in Queenstown for flats under 
the HDB home ownership scheme, 1965
177
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 187) ---
At first, not many people took part in the scheme. Even though the cost 
of buying a flat was subsidised, many families still could not afford one. 
Hence, in 1968, the government allowed them to use the savings in their 
Central Provident Fund (CPF)7 accounts to help fund the purchase of HDB 
flats. This increased the popularity of the scheme. By the mid-1970s, more 
than 40,000 families, most of whom had never owned their own homes
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 187) ---
before, were owners of their HDB flats. Read Source 4 to learn about a 
homeowner’s experience.
After the HDB had achieved its initial goal of providing sufficient housing 
for the population, it gradually introduced four- and five-room flats to 
meet the growing demand for larger homes. It also developed amenities 
such as markets, hawker centres, shops, clinics and schools in HDB estates, 
which made life more convenient for residents. By 1976, HDB flats housed
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 187) ---
more than half the population, a figure that continued to grow as the years 
went by. As household incomes rose, more Singaporeans were able to 
afford larger homes, with the percentage of HDB flats with three or more 
rooms increasing from 40 per cent in 1966 to 55 per cent in 1977. 
It was a big thing to get an HDB flat then. ... [It was] quite a big change. [Our old house was] low-lying and flood[ed] often.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 187) ---
... Sanitary condition[s were] poor. [We still used] the bucket system [and] had to use well water sometimes. There was no 
proper tap water. And when we went over to [the flat in Toa Payoh], it was on [the] 16th floor. ... I think we all felt much ... 
happier, [but also better] in terms of health condition[s]. Fresh air, clean surrounding[s] and beautiful views. ... In terms
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 187) ---
of sleeping area and all that, it [was] definitely cleaner. Not so much of the cockroaches and centipede[s] that [we had in 
the old place]. And so I think it was a tremendous improvement in terms of lifestyle, and it [made us feel good] that we 
were staying in a proper place of our own.
– Adapted from a 2011 oral interview with Koh Boon Long, who moved with his family to an HDB flat in 1970SOURCE 4
1. According to Source 4, what impact did moving to HDB flats have on residents such as Koh?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 187) ---
HDB neighbourhood in Eunos, with apartment blocks (background) located next 
to shops, a wet market and a hawker centre (foreground), 1977 New generation of flats under construction in Marine Parade, 1973
7 Under the CPF scheme, which was first set up in 1955, it was compulsory for employees to have a percentage of their monthly 
salaries set aside in their CPF accounts. This ensured they would have savings to use upon retirement.
178
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 188) ---
Construction of Toa Payoh Town, 1960s
 Crowd at the balloting ceremony for the sale of flats at Toa Payoh Town, 
1 October 1966
 Newly built food centre in Lorong 1 Toa Payoh, 1969
  Queen Elizabeth II of Britain touring Toa Payoh Town, 18 January 1972
 Aerial view of Toa Payoh Town, 1967Toa Payoh: Singapore’s First HDB Town
Toa Payoh was the first town entirely developed by the HDB. It was built based on the HDB’s new
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 188) ---
neighbourhood concept: small neighbourhoods grouped around a town centre, with each neighbourhood 
having its own facilities such as hawker centres, wet markets, shops and playgrounds.
179
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 189) ---
Strengthening the Education System
Singapore also faced the urgent challenge of educating and preparing its 
youth to enter the workforce. In 1965, a quarter of the population was 
still of schoolgoing age, and the literacy rate8 was a mere 60 per cent. In 
addition, more than 50,000 babies were being born annually; they would 
soon require an education too. Urgent action was needed to ensure that 
the youth would have the necessary values, skills and knowledge to earn a
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 189) ---
decent living and help build the nation.
First, the government had to ensure that there were sufficient resources 
to support the education of all students. In the early 1950s, the colonial 
government had begun building more schools to cater to the needs of the 
growing population. However, this was insufficient to meet the needs of a 
large and rapidly increasing number of children of schoolgoing age in the 
early 1960s.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 189) ---
early 1960s. 
Hence, during the years of full internal self-government and merger, about 
83 new schools were built, at a rate of around one per month. Additionally, 
teacher recruitment efforts increased significantly, such that within a 
decade of attaining full internal self-government, the number of teachers 
had almost doubled to over 19,000. Though schools still had to operate 
double sessions (morning and afternoon), they were now able to meet the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 189) ---
swiftly increasing demand for education.
8 The literacy rate measures the percentage of people within a country who can read and write. Generally, a higher literacy rate 
indicates that a country has provided for the education of its people. School building under construction, 1966Born in Kuala Lumpur, Malaya, Ong 
Pang Boon (b. 1929) entered politics 
when he assisted Lee Kuan Y ew during 
the 1955 election. Subsequently, he 
became the Organising Secretary
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 189) ---
became the Organising Secretary 
of the PAP . In 1959, he was elected 
into the Legislative Assembly as the 
representative for Telok Ayer.
As Minister for Education (1963–1970), 
Ong played an important role in 
strengthening Singapore’s education 
system. The National Pledge was also 
introduced during his term of service. 
Before his retirement from politics 
in 1988, he also served in various 
other ministerial 
roles, including in 
Home Affairs and 
the Environment. 
Ong was awarded
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 189) ---
the Environment. 
Ong was awarded 
the Order of Nila 
Utama (First Class) 
in 1990 for his 
contributions 
to Singapore.
Who was  
ONG PANG BOON?
?
180
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 190) ---
In line with the bilingual education policy, several changes were made to 
the education system. In 1960, the first integrated schools were set up. In 
these schools, students who had different first languages studied on the 
same campus. This encouraged more interracial mixing and unity among 
students and teachers alike. Additionally, all students in primary and 
secondary schools had to learn two languages. By the end of the 1960s,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 190) ---
the second language was made a compulsory examination subject in these 
schools.Schools continued to observe the bilingual education policy, which was 
first proposed by the colonial government in 1953 and implemented 
after Singapore attained full internal self-government. Under the policy, 
all students would learn both English and their respective vernacular 
languages. English would serve as a common language to help break down
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 190) ---
language barriers and foster stronger social bonds. At the same time, by 
learning their vernacular languages, students would remain connected to 
their ethnic and cultural roots.
English, one of the four official languages, was chosen as the common 
language as none of Singapore’s main ethnic groups could claim it as 
their own. This was to send the message that the government did not 
favour any ethnic group over the others. Furthermore, as English was
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 190) ---
used internationally as a language of commerce and industry, learning the 
language would help students secure a better future. Read Source 5 to find 
out more.
My mum started us off by putting me in Primary 1 in a Chinese school. So I spent one year learning only Chinese. … Then 
subsequently, her friends told her, “Oh, you cannot leave your son in a Chinese school. When they are educated in Chinese,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 190) ---
… they would find it very hard to get good jobs. And [if] you want to work for the civil service and all that, you must be 
English educated.” So she changed her mind and decided to transfer me to an English school. I had to start Primary 1 
again in English this time.
– Adapted from a 2002 oral interview with Lew Syn Pau, a student in the 1960s.  
Lew later went on to become an MP. SOURCE 5
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 190) ---
Lew later went on to become an MP. SOURCE 5
1. According to Source 5, what were the reasons for the increasing popularity of English-language education?
 Students at Tanjong Rhu Integrated Primary School 
attending a class taught in the Chinese language, 
1974. The school later merged with two other 
schools to become Tanjong Rhu Primary School, 
which was closed in 1989.
181
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 191) ---
Refer to Figure 10.6 below to find out more about how the government 
tried to strengthen the education system.
By the end of the 1970s, the government saw that further changes had 
to be made to the education system to meet the new demands of the 
developing economy and society. Thus, Deputy Prime Minister Dr Goh 
Keng Swee led a team to review the education system. The team released 
the Goh Report in 1979, recommending changes to education policies,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 191) ---
with an emphasis on the need to ensure that each child could learn at a 
pace suited to his or her ability.
 Education Minister Ong Pang Boon (centre) and 
his wife PAP MP Chan Choy Siong (centre right) at 
the opening of Queenstown Technical Secondary 
School (present-day Queenstown Secondary 
School) extension, 1968
 Students from Willow Avenue Secondary School in 
biology class, 1966. Located at Potong Pasir, the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 191) ---
school was closed in 1991. Figure 10.6: Some education policies from the late 1950s to the 1970s• All Singaporean children were 
provided with free primary education.
• The government called on families to 
send both their sons and daughters to 
school.• From 1969, all male lower secondary 
students and half the female cohort 
had to take up technical subjects such 
as Woodwork, Technical Drawing and 
Home Economics.
• More technical teachers were trained, 
and specialised schools were set up
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 191) ---
and specialised schools were set up 
to provide more opportunities for a 
technical education.
Examples of Actions  
That Were Taken
• Everyone would be able to 
contribute to Singapore’s 
economic progress. 
• This would help foster greater 
unity and a sense of national 
identity.• Students would have the 
necessary knowledge and skills 
to work in the industrial sector 
when they graduated. 
• A steady supply of trained 
workers would be available 
for the industrial sector, thus
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 191) ---
for the industrial sector, thus 
helping Singapore remain 
attractive to MNCs.
Reason
• Equal 
opportunities 
for education 
for girls and 
boys• Greater 
emphasis on 
mathematics, 
science and 
technical 
subjects in 
schools
Policy
182
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
Improving Public Health Standards
Singapore also faced challenges in public health.9 This was due to 
overcrowded and unsanitary living conditions, and poor general hygiene  
and health habits among large parts of the population. Unsurprisingly, 
there was a high infant mortality rate.10 In 1965, there were 27.3 deaths  
per 1,000 births. Life-threatening infectious diseases such as tuberculosis  
and cholera were also widespread. Read Source 6 to learn more about the 
living conditions then.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
living conditions then.
Since an unhealthy population would affect the development of the country, 
the government had to take steps to tackle the public health problems. 
Earlier, you saw how the new HDB flats provided more hygienic and spacious 
living conditions, which helped minimise the spread of diseases. However, 
Health Minister Yong Nyuk Lin and his successors still faced the challenge of 
dealing with many serious public health issues, which threatened the health
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
and livelihoods of the people. 
Refer to Figures 10.7 and 10.8 on the following pages to learn about 
these problems and the measures taken to improve the cleanliness of 
the environment (Figure 10.7) and public health standards (Figure 10.8) in 
Singapore.Cattle used to be farmed in heavily 
populated areas in Singapore. In the 
mid-1960s, a law was passed to clear 
them from these areas as they were 
seen as a threat to public health and 
property.DID YOU KNOW?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
property.DID YOU KNOW?
9 Public health is concerned with protecting and improving the lives of the population and includes aspects such as disease 
prevention and public hygiene.
10 The infant mortality rate measures the number of deaths under one year of age among the total number of live-born babies in 
a particular area. A lower infant mortality rate is one indicator of a better standard of healthcare in a country.Y ong Nyuk Lin (1918–2012) was 
born in Negeri Sembilan, Malaya.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
born in Negeri Sembilan, Malaya. 
Y ong joined the PAP in 1955 and was 
elected into the Legislative Assembly 
as the representative for Geylang West 
in 1959.
Following stints as Minister 
for Education and Minister for 
Health, Y ong served as Minister for 
Communications (1968–1975). Under 
his leadership, Singapore Airlines and 
the Singapore Telecommunications 
Authority (known today as Singtel) 
were created, and Singapore’s civil 
aviation and container port facilities 
were expanded.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
were expanded. 
Y ong retired from 
public service after 
serving as Singapore’s 
High Commissioner 
to Britain. In 1990, 
he was awarded 
the Order of 
Nila Utama 
(Second 
Class).
Who was  
YONG NYUK LIN?
?
The drain [near my house] was really filthy. ... It was almost like an open 
sewer, [and] ... a very convenient dumping ground for all kinds of waste. 
Chinese New Year, for example, that’s when we [did] spring cleaning. All the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
stuff [we didn’t] want, the most convenient place to throw it of course [was] 
this drain. ... Many of the rivers and streams in Singapore [were] used that 
way. ... It was quite a natural thing [to build our houses on stilts] because ... 
flooding was very common. ... [There was] garbage everywhere, [and] flies 
and mosquitoes. ... You would hear of cases of people down with malaria, 
typhoid, [tuberculosis. ... These were] conditions that [gave] rise to many of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 192) ---
these diseases and public health problems.
– Adapted from a 2015 oral interview with Yap Kheng Guan  
on life in a kampong during the 1950sSOURCE 6
1. From Source 6, what actions do you think needed to be taken to improve 
public hygiene?
183
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 193) ---
Problem Measures Taken
Many people lived in squatter settlements 
near waterways that flowed to Singapore’s 
reservoirs. Thus, there was a risk of sewage 
and other pollutants contaminating the water 
supply and posing a health hazard to the public.
People who lived in these settlements were 
rehoused in HDB estates. 
 HDB flats in Queenstown, 1962
Due to increased industrial activity in Singapore, 
the air was getting more polluted, which could 
result in health problems.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 193) ---
result in health problems. 
The government passed the Clean Air Act in 
1971, which regulated the emission of pollutants 
into the air. 
 Headline in The Straits Times, 11 April 1970  Headline in The Straits Times, 17 January 1972
Flooding frequently took place in several areas, 
which led to the spread of diseases such as 
dengue and cholera.
The government implemented flood control 
measures. For example, it built and widened 
drains and canals throughout the late 1960s  
and 1970s.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 193) ---
and 1970s.
 Flooded barber shop, 1967  Construction of a drainage canal, 1966Dealing with Public Health Issues
 Squatter settlement on Serangoon Road, 1963
Living Conditions
Air Pollution
Risk of Flooding
184
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 194) ---
Problem Measures Taken
 Figure 10.7: Public health issues and the measures taken to address them
Many in Singapore depended on street hawkers 
for their daily meals. However, a large number 
of the 50,000 street hawkers lacked knowledge 
of proper hygienic food preparation and waste 
disposal practices. Furthermore, 80% of them 
were unlicensed. This increased the risk of food 
poisoning.
All hawkers had to be registered and licensed. 
This meant they had to observe proper hygiene
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 194) ---
This meant they had to observe proper hygiene 
practices and be screened and vaccinated 
against tuberculosis and other communicable 
diseases. They were also moved off the streets 
and into hawker centres, which had running 
water, electricity and proper waste disposal 
facilities.
 Street hawkers preparing sweet potatoes by the road, 1969  Jurong Town Hawker Centre, 1975Hawker Hygiene
It was common for rubbish to be dumped on 
the streets, which attracted pests and became
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 194) ---
the streets, which attracted pests and became 
a potential breeding ground for diseases. Many 
people also had a habit of littering and spitting 
in public.
The Environmental Public Health Act was 
passed in 1968. Under the Act, people had to 
clear any rubbish dumped on their premises, 
and littering and spitting were punishable by 
fines. Waste collection was also improved, for 
example, through the purchase and use of new 
equipment.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 194) ---
equipment. 
 Pagoda Street in Chinatown filled with discarded rubbish, 1972  Anti-littering sign near the mouth of the Singapore River, 1969
Public Cleanliness
185
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 195) ---
186
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 196) ---
Empress Place Food Centre along the Singapore River, 1970s, with Empress Place Building (present-day Asian 
Civilisations Museum) and the clock tower of Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall in the background on the 
right. Empress Place Food Centre was opened in 1973 as part of Singapore’s scheme to move hawkers off 
the streets and improve hygiene levels. It was demolished in 1993 to make way for the redevelopment of the 
Singapore River. 
187
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 196) ---
Singapore River. 
187
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 197) ---
Learn more about further measures taken to improve public health 
standards as indicated on pages 188 and 189. 
 Health Minister 
Yong Nyuk Lin (third 
from left) touring 
the new extension 
to Thomson Road 
Hospital at its 
official opening, 
1965 Thomson Road 
Hospital, 1965
 Figure 10.8: Measures taken to improve public health standardsAim Examples
To increase awareness of important health 
practices regarding matters such as nutrition, 
maternal and infant care, and vaccination.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 197) ---
maternal and infant care, and vaccination.
To ensure that those in urgent need of medical 
care would receive prompt treatment at 
government hospitals.
Public health talks were held and media such 
as posters, pamphlets, cartoons and films were 
produced to spread public health messages.
Outpatient facilities at government hospitals 
were moved to separate government clinics, 
while both Thomson Road Hospital (part of 
present-day Changi General Hospital) and Tan
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 197) ---
present-day Changi General Hospital) and Tan 
Tock Seng Hospital were expanded to cater to 
more patients.
 Public health posters produced by the Ministry of Health in the 1970sConducting Public Health Campaigns
Improving Medical Facilities
188
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 198) ---
Headline in the New Nation, 16 October 1976  Anti-polio vaccination campaign at the Institute of 
Health, 1962
 Children of Far Eastern Kindergarten carrying out their daily toothbrushing 
routine, introduced as part of the Ministry of Health’s toothbrushing campaign, 
1973 Students from Balestier Road Primary School lining up to have their 
teeth examined, 1970. The school has since closed.
Aim Examples
To tackle the high occurrence of medical and 
dental issues among school-age children.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 198) ---
dental issues among school-age children.
The School Health Service introduced measures 
such as vaccinations and regular health check-
ups in schools. Dental clinics were also set up in 
all new schools to detect dental problems.
To ensure that the tens of thousands of babies 
born each year in Singapore grew up strong and 
healthy.
As parents often had fears about vaccinating their 
children, they were provided with information 
on the importance of being vaccinated against
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 198) ---
on the importance of being vaccinated against 
serious diseases such as diphtheria.Improving Healthcare for School-Age Children
Improving Maternal and Child Healthcare
189
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 199) ---
In 1966, Kandang Kerbau Maternity 
Hospital (now known as KK Women’s 
and Children’s Hospital) set a world 
record as the world’s busiest maternity 
hospital, with 39,856 babies born in that 
year alone. It held this record for 10 years. DID YOU KNOW?
As a result of the measures mentioned in Figures 10.7 and 10.8, the health of 
Singapore’s population improved. For example, Singapore’s infant mortality 
rate, which is an important indicator of the overall health of a country,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 199) ---
dropped. Study Source 7 to find out more.
Mother with her newborn baby at Kandang Kerbau 
Maternity Hospital, 1972
Having read about 
the various challenges, 
which ones do you think 
were most urgent for the 
government to address upon 
independence? Why?Think!
– Graph showing infant mortality rates in Singapore and selected developed countries (1965–1979), taken from World Bank dataSOURCE 7
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 199) ---
1. According to Source 7, how did Singapore’s infant mortality rate compare to those of the other countries listed in the 
graph between 1965 and 1979?
2. What does this tell you about efforts at improving maternal and child healthcare in Singapore?
20
1025
1530
1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1968 1966 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1979Infant mortality rate (deaths per 1,000 live births)
YearUnited StatesSingapore
United Kingdom
AustraliaLegend
190
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 199) ---
United Kingdom
AustraliaLegend
190
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 200) ---
How Did People’s Lives Change 
by the End of the 1970s?
ConclusionAs a result of the measures taken to address challenges to Singapore’s 
economy, national identity and society, people’s lives changed in various 
ways. Not only did their living standards improve, many also felt a greater 
sense of belonging and identity as Singaporeans.
Changes in Living Standards
By the late 1970s, the quality of life in Singapore had improved, as many
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 200) ---
people had better-paying jobs and lived in better conditions. They could 
afford basic necessities, and some even had the means to purchase items 
such as refrigerators and televisions, which were previously considered 
luxuries. The number of privately owned cars also increased. By 1973, there 
were 85 cars per 1,000 people, compared to just 58 cars per 1,000 people 
seven years earlier.
Greater Rootedness
Even as Singapore underwent rapid economic development, many felt
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 200) ---
more rooted to the nation. As people now enjoyed a higher standard 
of living, they had less reason to seek better prospects elsewhere. Being 
able to purchase their own homes also helped foster a greater sense of 
belonging among many Singaporeans. As they had invested a substantial 
portion of their hard-earned money in purchasing their own homes in 
Singapore, they felt that they had a stake in its continued success.
At the time of separation from Malaysia, Singapore had already experienced
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 200) ---
many changes from its days of self-government and merger. But as an 
independent nation-state, it faced a fresh set of challenges. New measures 
were needed in order to ensure that its people would not only survive 
but thrive under the new and unfamiliar circumstances. By the end of the 
1970s, Singapore was in a better position to face the future as a young 
nation-state.
 Last-minute Christmas shopping at Plaza 
Singapura, 1976
 Spectators along North Bridge Road watching the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 200) ---
Spectators along North Bridge Road watching the 
march-past heading to the Padang for the 1972 
National Day Parade
191
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 201) ---
You have seen how much people’s lives changed after 9 August 1965. You have also seen that some of these 
changes began before independence and continued into the post-independence years.
Review what you have learnt in this chapter by reflecting on the extent to which people’s lives were 
transformed in the period from independence to the end of the 1970s. Follow the steps on the next page 
and fill in the table below. The first row has been filled in for you.LET’S REVIEW
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 201) ---
Area of FocusWhat Were Some Developments  
or Events That Took Place?What Changed? What Stayed the Same? How Far Were People’s Lives Transformed?
Economy• Attempts were made to diversify the 
economy, leading to a significant increase  
in manufacturing activity.
• The 1973 oil crisis affected Singapore’s 
economy.• T ens of thousands of new jobs were 
created.
• Many people enjoyed a higher 
standard of living.
• The oil crisis led to an increase in the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 201) ---
• The oil crisis led to an increase in the 
cost of living.• The government continued to attract MNCs 
 to set up factories in Singapore. No 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
National  
Identity No 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
HousingNo 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
EducationNo 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
Public HealthNo 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
192
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 202) ---
• In the second column, write down some developments or events that took place during this period.
• In the third and fourth columns, write down what changed and what stayed the same as a result of these 
developments or events.
• In the fifth column, indicate how far you think people’s lives were transformed. 
Area of FocusWhat Were Some Developments  
or Events That Took Place?What Changed? What Stayed the Same? How Far Were People’s Lives Transformed?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 202) ---
Economy• Attempts were made to diversify the 
economy, leading to a significant increase  
in manufacturing activity.
• The 1973 oil crisis affected Singapore’s 
economy.• T ens of thousands of new jobs were 
created.
• Many people enjoyed a higher 
standard of living.
• The oil crisis led to an increase in the 
cost of living.• The government continued to attract MNCs 
 to set up factories in Singapore. No 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
National  
Identity No
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 202) ---
transformation1 2 3 4 5
National  
Identity No 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
HousingNo 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
EducationNo 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
Public HealthNo 
transformationTotal 
transformation1 2 3 4 5
193
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 203) ---
Up to the 1950s, many women in Singapore did not 
have the chance to go to school or work. They were 
often expected to focus on their traditional roles as 
wives and mothers, while men had the opportunity to 
receive an education and were the main breadwinner. 
This changed, especially after independence, as more 
educational and job opportunities became available 
to women. 
More and more parents became open to sending their 
daughters to school. By 1974, the number of girls
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 203) ---
enrolled in primary and secondary schools was almost 
equal to that of boys. Female students also made up 
45.1 per cent of students enrolled in local universities 
in 1976, up from 30 per cent in 1966.
Women also had more opportunities to work outside 
their homes. More decided to join the workforce, as 
Singapore’s growing economy meant more jobs were 
available, and with better salaries, working hours 
and benefits. As a result, the percentage of women
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 203) ---
participating in the labour force increased significantly 
between 1970 and 1980, as shown in Figure 10.9.
But did these opportunities change the experiences 
of women in every workplace? Read the following 
sources to find out more.How far did the experiences of women in the workplace in Singapore  
change between 1965 and the end of the 1970s?CASE INVESTIGATION
 One of Singapore’s first female taxi drivers, 197610 20 30 40 50 60 70 80All  
Males
All 
 Females
Chinese 
Males
Malay 
Males
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 203) ---
Males
All 
 Females
Chinese 
Males
Malay 
Males
Indian 
MalesChinese 
Females
Malay 
Females
Indian 
Females
Participation in the Labour Force (%)
 Figure 10.9: Graph showing the participation in the labour force in 1970  
and 1980Legend 1980 197067.6%
24.6%
66.8%
27.0%
66.3%
75.4%
16.0%14.3%72.0%
39.3%
71.5%
39.7%
71.9%
75.3%
38.2%38.3%
194
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 204) ---
SOURCE B
 Male and female workers at a factory manufacturing typewriters in Bedok, 1974
In 1970, Madam Chan Choy Siong stepped down from her Anson parliamentary seat to make way for new blood. We’ve had 
no female Members of Parliament since.* … The pool of women who meet the … requirements is small, and the number 
of women in that pool willing to consider a political career is much, much smaller. Singapore women are rapidly climbing
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 204) ---
the job ladder, moving confidently into … management positions, showing that gender is, in most cases, an … obstacle 
only in [people’s] minds. More and more, … women are running key departments if not entire organisations. Isn’t it time 
women began to take a more active interest in the running of the country?
– Adapted from an article in The Singapore Monitor, a local newspaper, titled “It’s About Time We Had a Woman MP”, 24 April 1984
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 204) ---
* Between 1970 and 1984, all of Singapore’s MPs were male.SOURCE A
195
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 205) ---
Despite the laws and government policies, there are, I am afraid, still unfair prejudices against women in working life, 
in terms of allocation of responsibilities, promotion and training opportunities. These should be removed. I appeal to 
Singapore men to take a hard look at themselves. Male employers and superiors should not underrate the abilities of 
their female employees or subordinates. Of course, deep-rooted prejudices against women cannot be removed overnight
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 205) ---
by speeches or curbed by law. Respect has to be earned and I am confident that our Singapore women will respond to 
the challenge with a little help from their male counterparts in society and in the home. Singapore men should in turn 
shoulder greater responsibility at home at caring for, guiding and educating the children.
– An excerpt from the opening address by then Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Abdul Rahim Ishak
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 205) ---
at a seminar organised by the Singapore Business and Professional Women’s Association, 21 September 1979SOURCE E
Five women have taken the initial step towards becoming the first woman air traffic controllers in the 15-year history of 
the Department of Civil Aviation. They joined eight men in an introductory course to air traffic control. … Mr Willy Kwang 
[the Assistant Director of Civil Aviation (Operations)] said: “Women were not considered suitable for air traffic control
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 205) ---
originally as it was feared that maternity leave * for them would [have an impact on how much they could contribute at 
work]. But now men also need long leave for their National Service commitments† so that is not a valid reason any more.” 
He added: “Asian women were also considered to be more ‘fragile’ than their Western counterparts. Controlling air traffic 
is not easy.”
– Adapted from an article in The Straits Times, titled “Singapore’s First Women Air Traffic Controllers”, 28 July 1976
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 205) ---
* Maternity leave refers to a period of absence from work granted by an employer to a mother before and after the birth of her child.
† After completing their National Service, Singaporean men may be called up for up to 40 days of reservist duties every year, for 
which employers in Singapore must grant them leave under the law.SOURCE C
There was inequality [between men and women] in terms of employment. ... Even in the civil service, there was unequal
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 205) ---
pay. A male and a female with exactly the same educational background, even exactly the same age, would be employed 
into the government service at different pay, even in teaching. My sister started work in 1964, and I think her pay ... was 
at least $100 less than [that of] her male colleague, and the pay at that time was not high. ... They ended unequal pay by 
the time I joined the service … in 1969.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 205) ---
the time I joined the service … in 1969.
– Adapted from a 2005 oral interview with Koh Sauk Keow, a female teacher in the late 1960sSOURCE D
196
SURVIVING AS AN INDEPENDENT NATION-STATE (1965–LATE 1970 S)
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 206) ---
1. Read Source A. Identify one area of change and one area of continuity in terms of the role of women 
after independence.
2. Study Source B. What does it tell you about men’s and women’s opportunities in the workplace?
3. Read Source C. What reasons were given for women not being employed as air traffic controllers in the 
past?
4. Read Source D. According to the source, in what ways might women not feel valued in the workplace?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 206) ---
5. Read Source E. What was significant about the Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs giving this 
speech?INVESTIGATE!
How far do you think the experiences of women in the workplace changed? Fill in the table below using 
evidence from the sources. An example has been done for you. Do note that some sources may only 
contain evidence that suggests either more or less advancement.REPORT!
How Far Did the Experiences of Women in the Workplace
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 206) ---
in Singapore Change Between 1965 and the End of the 1970s?
Area Where More Advancement Was Made Area Where Less Advancement Was Made
Source A states that “more and more, … women 
are running key departments if not entire 
organisations”, which shows that women had 
greater responsibilities at work than before.
I think that overall, after independence, women made great/small/few advancements in the workplace as …
197
TO WHAT EXTENT DID PEOPLE’S LIVES CHANGE AFTER INDEPENDENCE?
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 207) ---
Over the past two years, you have had an exciting 
journey uncovering Singapore’s history and exploring 
how it has developed over more than 700 years with 
influences from regional and global forces. 
You started by learning how Singapore was a part of key 
trading networks with India, China, the Southeast Asian 
region and beyond from as early as 1299. You went on 
to find out how British rule and external developments, 
as well as the contributions of various migrants, helped
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 207) ---
make Singapore a dynamic and flourishing port city.
You also witnessed how Singapore fell to the Japanese 
during World War II, and what changes this brought to 
the lives of the people. Subsequently, you learnt how its 
post-World War II road to independence was influenced 
by global and regional forces, and individuals during 
this period. Finally, you explored the challenges that 
Singapore faced as a young nation-state and uncovered 
how its people overcame these difficulties.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 207) ---
how its people overcame these difficulties. 
Throughout your study of Singapore’s journey through 
time, you have seen how the course of its history 
was dependent on the interaction between historical 
circumstances and the decisions and actions of 
individuals. Bearing that in mind, take some time to 
reflect on the roles people have played in shaping 
developments in Singapore from 1299 to the end of the 
1970s, and how their contributions are still evident in 
Singapore today.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 207) ---
Singapore today. 
 Majapahit-style headless 
horseman, c. 14th century Pages of the 1819 Treaty between  
Sir Stamford Raffles, Sultan Hussein 
and Temenggong Abdul Rahman
 Boat Quay, 1920s
 Female internees forced to bow 
to their Japanese guards at Sime 
Road Camp, 1942 
 First batch 
of national 
servicemen 
taking the Oath of 
Allegiance, 1967 Chinese Middle School Student Riots, May 1954
 Central Business 
District, 1977 Prime Minister 
Lee Kuan Yew 
speaking over 
television on
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 207) ---
Lee Kuan Yew 
speaking over 
television on 
Singapore’s 
separation 
from Malaysia, 
9 August 1965 Rickshaw puller and 
his passenger, c. 1890s
 British commanders on their way to surrender to the 
Japanese, 15 February 1942
What You Have LearntCONCLUSION
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 208) ---
View of Singapore River, 1978, Kouo Shang-Wei
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
Acknowledgements
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the following for permission to use copyright materials:
i Sunset and clouds © Paul shuang/Shutterstock.com. Old Supreme Court and Municipal Building © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage 
Board. xiii–ix Ellenborough Market, 1950s, by Lui Hock Seng © Lui Hock Seng, courtesy of Objectifs. x Aerial view of the Singapore River and the surrounding
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
Central Business District, 1971, by Kouo Shang-Wei © Kouo Shang-Wei Collection, National Library, Singapore. 2  Parade at the Padang during the Japanese Occupation, 
1942 © Lim Kheng Chye Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Admiral Louis Mountbatten inspecting the Royal Navy Guard of Honour at the 
Padang, 1945, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. Scene near the Padang during the Maria Hertogh Riots, 1950 © Kenneth Chia Collection, courtesy of National
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew delivering a speech following the all-party delegation’s return from the Second Merdeka Talks, 1957. Source: The Straits Times  
© Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 2–3 View of the Padang, City Hall and St Andrew’s Cathedral, 1950s © Arthur B. Reich Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 3 “Majulah Singapura” being sung for the first time as Singapore’s State Anthem, 1959 © Yusof Ishak Collection, courtesy
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
of National Archives of Singapore. Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall, 1963 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. Ceremonial parade at the Padang during the opening of the first Singapore Parliament, 1965 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy 
of National Archives of Singapore. 4  Sunset background © DAIVI/Shutterstock.com. British POWs marching on the road to Changi, 1942 © David Ng Collection,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Subhas Chandra Bose inspecting the guard of honour presented by women soldiers in the INA at Waterloo Street, 1943 
© Nirvan Thivy Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Female internees forced to bow to their Japanese guards at Sime Road Camp, 1942 © 
Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Ration card issued during the Japanese Occupation, 1943 © Loh Teck Cheong Collection, courtesy of National Archives
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
of Singapore. Lim Bo Seng © Lim Leong Geok Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Elizabeth Choy © Ministry of Information and the Arts 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Cover of a magazine on the Manifesto for Greater East Asian Cooperation, published in 1942 © Courtesy of 
Kodansha. Nippon-go lessons published in Syonan Shimbun, 2 September 1943 © National Library Board. Severely malnourished Australian soldiers in a hospital
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
ward after being released from Changi Prison, 1945, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. Settlers ploughing the ground in Bahau, Malaya, c. 1944 © F. A. C. Oehlers 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Concert programme poster by William Haxworth, 1942 © W. R. M. Haxworth Collection, courtesy of 
National Archives of Singapore. Cheering crowds of children welcoming the return of the British forces to Singapore, 1945 © Imperial War Museum. Admiral
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
Mountbatten announcing the Japanese surrender at City Hall, 2 September 1945 © Imperial War Museum. 5  Street in Singapore during the Japanese Occupation, 
1943 © From Shashin Shuho, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 6  Battleship USS Arizona burning after the attack on Pearl Harbor, 7 December 1941 © 
Everett Collection/Shutterstock.com. Sook Ching screening station at North Bridge Road, 1942 © Tham Sien Yen Collection from The Nanyang Miscellany, courtesy
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
of National Archives of Singapore. Settlers ploughing the ground in Bahau, Malaya, c. 1944 © F. A. C. Oehlers Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 
7 Atomic cloud rising over Nagasaki, 9 August 1945, courtesy of National Archives and Records Administration. General Umezu Yoshijiro signing the surrender 
documents on board the USS Missouri, 2 September 1945 © INTERFOTO/ Alamy Stock Photo. Admiral Mountbatten announcing the Japanese surrender at City Hall,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
2 September 1945 © Imperial War Museum. 8  Buildings damaged by Japanese bombings, February 1942, Clifford Bottomley, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 
10 Sketch by Liu Kang showing a Japanese soldier pulling out the nails of a detainee to get a confession © Vol II Chop Suey, 1946, courtesy of Liu Kang family. British 
POWs marching on the road to Changi Prison, 1942 © David Ng Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 11 YMCA building on Stamford Road, 1930s
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
© RAFSA Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Sook Ching screening station at North Bridge Road, 1942 © Tham Sien Yen Collection from The 
Nanyang Miscellany, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 13 Wallet belonging to Dr J. C. Chen, c. 1942 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National 
Heritage Board. Set of keychain and whistle belonging to a victim of Operation Sook Ching, 1942 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
Board. Pair of earrings belonging to a victim of Operation Sook Ching, 1942 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Stethoscope 
belonging to a victim of Operation Sook Ching, 1942 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Persecution by Singaporean artist 
Koeh Sia Yong, 1963, showing Chinese men being taken to the execution ground during Operation Sook Ching © Lee Gallery. Civilian War Memorial, late 1960s ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 14 Tan Kah Kee © Tan Kah Kee Memorial Museum, Jimei. Propaganda poster with the caption 
“Vim, vigour, vitality and last, but not least, perfect harmony!” , c. 1943 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Cathay Building, 1945 
© Margaret Clarke Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 15 Subhas Chandra Bose inspecting the guard of honour presented by women soldiers
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
in the INA at Waterloo Street, 1943 © Courtesy of Netaji Research Bureau, Kolkata. 16 Poster distributed in Singapore during the Japanese Occupation celebrating 
the tencho setsu, c. 1943 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 17 Japanese postcard for occupied nations, c. 1943 © Courtesy of National Museum of 
Singapore, National Heritage Board. 18 Japanese language students with their Japanese teacher, 1942 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Nippon-go
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
lessons published in Syonan Shimbun, 2 September 1943 © National Library Board. Picture chart published in a local newspaper teaching basic Japanese terms and 
how to count, published between 1943 and 1944 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 19 Page from the Sakura Shimbun © Courtesy of National Archives 
of Singapore. Mass exercise in a school during the Japanese Occupation, c. 1940s © From Shashin Shuho, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 20 Rice
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
purchasing card issued during the Japanese Occupation, c. 1942 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 100-dollar note used during 
the Japanese Occupation © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 10-dollar note used during the Japanese Occupation © Courtesy 
of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 5-dollar note used during the Japanese Occupation © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
National Heritage Board. 21 Source 1 © From the oral history interview of Karmakar, Ronendra (Accession No. 000343/Reel/Disc No. 4), Oral History Centre, National 
Archives of Singapore. Source 2 © Thio Chan Bee, Extraordinary Adventures of an Ordinary Man (London: Grosvenor Books, 1977), courtesy of Timothy Ang. 22  
Severely malnourished Australian soldiers in a hospital ward after being released from Changi Prison, September 1945, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. Part
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
of the Siam-Burma Railway, c. 1943 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. POW in Changi Prison, 1945 © BNA Photographic/ Alamy Stock Photo. 22–23  
Sunset © M. Shcherbyna/Shutterstock.com. Drawing by Murray Griffin of the interior of Changi Prison, 1945, courtesy of Australian War Memorial. 23 Bridge Over 
the River Kwai by Leo Rawlings, 1943 © By permission of the copyright holder, Dr J. Mullender. Allied POWs laying track in Ronsi, Burma, c. 1943, courtesy of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
Australian War Memorial. 24  Mamoru Shinozaki © Marshall Cavendish International (Asia) Pte Ltd. Settlers clearing the jungle land in Bahau, Malaya, c. 1943 © 
Courtesy of Missions Etrangères de Paris, Singapore. Settlers ploughing the ground in Bahau, Malaya, c. 1944 © F. A. C. Oehlers Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. Source 3 © J. F. Conceicao, Flavours of Change: Destiny & Diplomacy: Recollections of a Singapore Ambassador (Singapore: Horizon Books,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 209) ---
2004), courtesy of Ian Conceicao. 25 Football team of the Syonan Sports Association, c. 1942 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Poster for The Fall of 
Singapore, about the Japanese attack on Singapore, 1942 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Concert programme poster by 
William Haxworth, 1942 © W. R. M. Haxworth Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Write-up on William Haxworth © Courtesy of National
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Archives of Singapore. The Road Sweeper by William Haxworth, 1945 © W. R. M. Haxworth Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 26 Chin Peng 
receiving British campaign medals from Admiral Mountbatten, c. 1945 © Imperial War Museum. Members of Force 136, c. 1944 © Tham Sien Yen Collection, courtesy 
of National Archives of Singapore. 27 Lim Bo Seng © Lim Leong Geok Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Extract from the farewell letter Lim
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Bo Seng wrote to his wife while in prison in 1944 © Courtesy of Dr Lim Whye Geok. Lim Bo Seng’s diary © Courtesy of Dr Lim Whye Geok. Elizabeth Choy © Ministry 
of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. OBE medal awarded to Elizabeth Choy in 1946 © Courtesy of National Museum 
of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 28 US Navy planes in formation over the USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay, where the Japanese surrender took place, 2 September
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
1945, courtesy of National Archives and Records Administration. 29 Admiral Mountbatten announcing the Japanese surrender at City Hall, 2 September 1945 © 
Imperial War Museum. Children in Singapore cheering British troops as they entered Singapore at the end of World War II, 1945, Argus Newspaper Collection of 
Photographs, State Library of Victoria. British flag flying above a cheering crowd during the arrival of the British in Singapore, 1945 © Imperial War Museum. Source
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
4 © From the oral history interview of Soh Guan Bee (Accession No. 000310/Reel/Disc No. 9), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. 30 Hotel Fort 
Canning, the former headquarters of the BMA © Rolf Richardson/ Alamy Stock Photo. Envelope stamped with the British Military Administration postmark “Delay 
Your Spending” , c. 1945 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. First post-war staff and students of Sin Sheng School, 1940s © Ang
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Pin Hoon Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 31 Source 5 © Cindy Chou, Beyond the Empires: Memories Retold (Singapore: Oral History Centre, 
National Archives of Singapore, 1995), courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Street scene in Singapore after the Japanese Occupation, c. 1945 © Imperial War 
Museum. 32–33 Old paper texture © Lukasz Szwaj/Shutterstock.com. 34 Source A © Lee Geok Boi, The Syonan Years: Singapore Under Japanese Rule 1942–1945
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
(Singapore: National Archives of Singapore: Epigram, 2005), courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Source B © Lee Geok Boi, The Syonan Years: Singapore 
Under Japanese Rule 1942–1945 (Singapore: National Archives of Singapore: Epigram, 2005), courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 35 Cover of a magazine on 
the Manifesto for Greater East Asian Cooperation, published in 1942 © Courtesy of Kodansha. 36 Photograph of local students learning Japanese in school,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
published in a Japanese newspaper on 22 July 1942 © Kingendai/ Afloimages. 38 Sunset © tose/Shutterstock.com. Clash between Chinese middle school students 
and the police, 1954 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. British troops arriving in Singapore at the start of the Malayan 
Emergency, 1948, courtesy of National Army Museum. Riot police at the Hock Lee Bus Riots, 1955 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
National Archives of Singapore. Car overturned and set on fire during the Maria Hertogh Riots, 1950 © Kenneth Chia Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. Police attending to injured victims at the Hock Lee Bus Riots, 1955 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. Lim Yew Hock © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. David Marshall © Ministry of Information
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew © Lee Kuan Yew. Maria and her foster mother, Che Aminah, 1950. Source: The 
Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. The Rendel Commission meeting at Victoria Memorial Hall, 1953 © Ministry of 
Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. People in Singapore waiting to cast their votes, 30 May 1959. Source: The Straits
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Crowd at the PAP’s rally after the election, 1959 © Ministry of Information and the Arts 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 39  Chinese middle school students gathering to petition against the National Service Ordinance, 13 May 
1954 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 40 General Umezu Yoshijiro signing the surrender documents on board the USS
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Missouri, 2 September 1945 © INTERFOTO/ Alamy Stock Photo. British troops arriving in Singapore at the start of the Malayan Emergency, 1948, courtesy of National 
Army Museum. Admiral Mountbatten announcing the Japanese surrender at City Hall, 2 September 1945 © Imperial War Museum. Members of the Legislative 
Council, 1948 © Istana Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Car overturned and set on fire during the Maria Hertogh Riots, 1950 © Kenneth Chia
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 41 Battle of Dien Bien Phu, 1954 © CPA Media Pte Ltd / Alamy Stock Photo. Tunku Abdul Rahman proclaiming 
independence for Malaya, 31 August 1957 © World History Archive/ Alamy Stock Photo. Clash between Chinese middle school students and the police, May 1954 © 
Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Yusof bin Ishak being sworn in as the Yang di-Pertuan Negara, 3 December 1959 © Yusof Ishak
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 42  Mohandas K. Gandhi © GL Archive/ Alamy Stock Photo. Sukarno, courtesy of Royal Netherlands Institute 
of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies. Ho Chi Minh © World History Archive/ Alamy Stock Photo. 45 Front page of The Singapore Free Press, 16 June 1948. 
Source: The Singapore Free Press © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. British troops patrolling in Malaya during the Malayan
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Emergency, 1957, courtesy of National Army Museum. Road to Fraser’s Hill in Malaysia, where Gurney was assassinated in 1951 © David May. 46 Source 1 © Media 
Masters Publishing Sdn Bhd. Mao Zedong © Sueddeutsche Zeitung Photo/ Alamy Stock Photo. Source 2 © From the oral history interview of Jumabhoy, Rajabali 
(Accession No. 000074/Reel/Disc No. 15), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. 47  Interior of a slum dwelling in Bukit Ho Swee Estate, 1947 ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Source 3. Source: The Singapore Free Press © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. 
48 SIT flats in Tiong Bahru Estate, c. 1953 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Workers having lunch at a People’s Restaurant, c. 
1946 © Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Source 4 © From the oral history interview of Tan Beng Neo (Accession No.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
000371/Reel/Disc No. 16), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. 49 Members of the Singapore Harbour Board Staff Association at a meeting to plan 
for a strike, 1953. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Devan Nair © Ministry of Information, Communications 
and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 50 Coolies transporting goods along the Singapore River, 1948 © Courtesy of National Archives
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
of Singapore. 52 Composition of registered voters in 1948 © National University of Singapore Press. Singapore Progressive Party logo © Singapore Elections. C. C. 
Tan accepting his victory at the 1948 election © Malaya Tribune, courtesy of National Library Board. Members of the Legislative Council, 1948 © Istana Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 53  Protesters outside the Supreme Court at the start of the Maria Hertogh Riots, 11 December 1950 © Kenneth Chia
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Maria and her foster mother, Che Aminah, 1950. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings 
Limited. Reprinted with permission. Maria leaving the court after the hearing of her case, with Che Aminah on her right, 24 November 1950. Source: The Straits 
Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Che Aminah leaving the Supreme Court after her appeal was rejected, 11 December 1950 ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
Kenneth Chia Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 55 Police trying to control the crowd of students during the Anti-National Service Riots, May 
1954. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Clash between the students and the police, May 1954 © Courtesy 
of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 56 Source 5 © From the oral history interview of McNeice, Thomas Percy Ferguson (Sir) (Accession No.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 210) ---
000099/Reel/Disc No. 19), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. Arch in front of the Supreme Court commemorating Singapore being conferred
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
city status on 22 September 1951 © J. E. Gabain Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. School exhibition to commemorate City Day, 22 September 
1951 © Bukit Panjang Government School Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 57  The Rendel Commission meeting at Victoria Memorial Hall, 
1953 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 58 Election van being driven around Singapore to inform
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
people of the 1955 election © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Labour Front logo © Singapore Elections. 
David Marshall addressing a crowd at Empress Place, 1955. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. People’s Action 
Party logo © People’s Action Party. Lee Kuan Yew campaigning at Farrer Park, 1955. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
permission. 59 Source 6 © From the oral history interview of Marshall, David Saul (Accession No. 000156/Reel/Disc No. 7), Oral History Centre, National Archives 
of Singapore. Article in The Straits Times, 4 April 1955. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 60 Source 7 © 
From the oral history interview of Marshall, David Saul (Accession No. 000156/Reel/Disc No. 7), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. David Marshall
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
© Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 63  Lim Yew Hock © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Negotiations between British colonial authorities and the Singapore all-party delegation led by David Marshall during 
the First Merdeka Talks in London, 1956 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 64 On Strike, 1955, Tan Tee
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Chie, Oil on canvas, 66 x 86.5 cm © Collection of National Gallery Singapore. 67  Lim Chin Siong © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of 
National Archives of Singapore. Fong Swee Suan. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Students and police at 
Chung Cheng High School during the Chinese Middle School Student Riots, 1956. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
permission. 68 Article in The Straits Times, 12 April 1950. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Crowd before 
the Supreme Court breaking the police cordon during the Maria Hertogh Riots, 1950 © Kenneth Chia Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Muslim 
demonstrators shouting slogans in front of the Supreme Court during the Maria Hertogh Riots, 1950 © Kenneth Chia Collection, courtesy of National Archives of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Singapore. Students protesting during the Anti-National Service Riots, 1954 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Police trying 
to control the crowd of students during the Anti-National Service Riots, 1954. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with 
permission. Students protesting during the Anti-National Service Riots, 1954 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Article in The
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Straits Times, 14 May 1954. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 69  Police attending to injured victims at the 
Hock Lee Bus Riots, 1955 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Scene during the Hock Lee Bus Riots, 1955 
© Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Article in The Straits Times, 28 April 1955. Source: The Straits Times
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
© Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Police erecting barricades in Chinatown during the Hock Lee Bus Riots, 1955 © Francis Lee Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Students from the Chinese High School moving down Bukit Timah Road towards the city during the Chinese Middle 
School Student Riots, 1956 © National Archives, United Kingdom. Firemen investigating a burnt-out van in South Street during the Chinese Middle School Student
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Riots, 1956 © National Archives, United Kingdom. Police officer investigating a burnt-out van in South Street during the Chinese Middle School Student Riots, 1956 
© National Archives, United Kingdom. Article in The Straits Times, 26 October 1956. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with 
permission. 70 Lim Yew Hock on his return from the Second Merdeka Talks in London, 1957. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Reprinted with permission. 71 Colourful poster encouraging voters to vote, 1959 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Voters lining up at one of the polling 
stations, 30 May 1959 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Headline from The Straits Times, 31 May 1959. 
Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 74  Extract from Lee Kuan Yew’s speech at the PAP’s rally in front of City
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Hall, 3 June 1959 © Han Fook Kwang, Warren Fernandez, Sumiko Tan, Lee Kuan Yew: The Man and His Ideas (Singapore: Marshall Cavendish International, 2015). PAP’s 
rally in front of City Hall after the election, 3 June 1959 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 74–75 Crowd 
at the Padang after the election, 3 June 1959 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 75 PAP’s rally in front
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
of City Hall after the election, 3 June 1959 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew © Lee Kuan 
Yew. 76 State Flag © National Heritage Board. State Crest © National Heritage Board. Original score of “Majulah Singapura” by Zubir Said © Courtesy of National 
Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Yusof bin Ishak © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Yusof bin Ishak being sworn in as the Yang di-Pertuan Negara, 3 December 1959 © Yusof Ishak Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 77  The Yang 
di-Pertuan Negara, members of the Cabinet and the Legislative Assembly at the steps of City Hall, 3 December 1959 © Yusof Ishak Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. 78  Members of the Legislative Council, 1948 © Istana Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Maria leaving the court after
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
the hearing of her case, with Che Aminah on her right, 24 November 1950. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 
Lim Yew Hock on his return from the Second Merdeka Talks in London, 1957. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with 
permission.Lee Kuan Yew being carried by supporters after winning the 1959 election © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Archives of Singapore. 79  Clash between the students and the police during the Anti-National Service Riots, 1954 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, 
National Heritage Board. David Marshall addressing a crowd at Empress Place, 1955. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with 
permission. Police erecting barricades in Chinatown during the Hock Lee Bus Riots, 1955 © Francis Lee Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Students from the Chinese High School moving down Bukit Timah Road towards the city during the Chinese Middle School Student Riots, 1956 © National 
Archives, United Kingdom. 80 Source B © From the oral history interview of Chan, Robin Pitt Thong (Accession No. 002370/Reel/Disc No. 4), Oral History Centre, 
National Archives of Singapore. 81 Source C © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Source D © National
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Heritage Board. 82  Source E © From the oral history interview of Fong Sip Chee (Accession No. 000024/Reel/Disc No. 22), Oral History Centre, National Archives 
of Singapore. Source F © Cambridge University Press. People in Singapore waiting to cast their votes, 30 May 1959. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press 
Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 84 Field at dawn © Maxim Khytra/Shutterstock.com. Voters queueing to cast their votes on the options of merger,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
1962 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr Lee Siew Choh speaking at a Barisan Sosialis mass rally in 
Geylang Serai, 1962. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. The Battle for Merger, published in 1961 © Courtesy 
of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Tengku Abdul Rahman and Lee Kuan Yew at Paya Lebar Airport, 24 October 1961. Source: The Straits
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 211) ---
Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Part of a flyer showing the options offered in the 1962 referendum © Ministry of Information 
and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Counting of ballot papers at the Singapore Badminton Hall counting centre during the 1962
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
referendum © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall, 16 September 
1963 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Roadblock set up by police and soldiers in the North Bridge 
Road area, 24 July 1964 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew breaking down at a press
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
conference in 1965 on the end of the merger with Malaysia. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Headline in 
The Straits Times, 10 August 1965. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 85 Headline in The Straits Times, 16 
September 1963. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 86 Tunku Abdul Rahman proclaiming independence for
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Malaya, 31 August 1957 © World History Archive/ Alamy Stock Photo. Tunku Abdul Rahman delivering a speech in Singapore that sets in motion the plans for the 
formation of Malaysia, 27 May 1961 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Members of the Cobbold 
Commission, 1962 courtesy of British Government. Lee Kuan Yew being carried by supporters after winning the 1959 election © Ministry of Information and the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Ong Eng Guan, winner of the 1961 Hong Lim by-election © Ministry of Information and the Arts 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew giving one of his speeches advocating merger at Radio Singapore, 1961 © Ministry of Culture 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 87 Devan Nair being carried by supporters after winning a seat in the Bangsar constituency in the 1964
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
federal election © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall, 16 September 
1963 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Roadblock set up by police and soldiers in the North Bridge 
Road area, 24 July 1964 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew announcing the separation, 9
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
August 1965. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 89  Source 1 © Text of Prime Minister Mr Lee Kuan Yew’s 
broadcast over Radio Singapore on 13 September 1961 at 7.30 p.m., Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Causeway connecting 
Singapore to Malaya, 1952 © National Archives of Australia. 90 Cartoon from The Straits Times, 24 September 1960. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 91 Tunku Abdul Rahman © AGIP/Bridgeman Images. 92  Ong Eng Guan attending a press conference, 1960 © Ministry 
of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Ong Eng Guan, winner of the 1961 Hong Lim by-election, 29 April 1961 © Ministry 
of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 93  Headline in The Sunday Times, 28 May 1961. Source: The Straits Times ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Cartoon in The Straits Times, 29 July 1961. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings 
Limited. Reprinted with permission. Tunku Abdul Rahman with Lee Kuan Yew, 16 November 1961. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. 
Reprinted with permission. 95 Dr Lee Siew Choh speaking at a Barisan Sosialis mass rally in Geylang Serai, 1962. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Limited. Reprinted with permission. Dr Lee Siew Choh. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 96 Source 2 © 
Singapore Parliamentary Debates – Official Reports, Vol. 15, Issue No. 5, Col. 383–384, 21 November 1961. Used with the permission of the Parliament of Singapore. 
Participants discussing the merger in a Radio Singapore forum held on 12 June 1962 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
of Singapore. 97  Lee Kuan Yew giving one of his talks at Radio Singapore, 1961 © Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. The 
Battle for Merger, published in 1961 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Dr Toh Chin Chye and S. Rajaratnam touring the 
Malaysia Exhibition, 1962 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 98 Merger and Your Future, 1961 ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. The Merger Plan, c. 1961 © Ministry of Culture. Malaysia the New Nation, 1963 © Courtesy 
of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. 99 Part of a flyer showing the options offered in the 1962 referendum © Ministry of Information and 
the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Diorama at the National Museum of Singapore depicting the people in Singapore discussing the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
issue of merger with Malaya © John Michael, food 8nd trips. Two men studying the options for the 1962 referendum © Ministry of Information and the Arts 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 100 Counting of ballot papers at the Singapore Badminton Hall counting centre during the 1962 referendum 
© Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Sealing of ballot boxes with sealing wax during the 1962 referendum
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
© Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 102  Lee Kuan Yew waving to supporters on his return from signing 
the Malaysia Agreement in London, July 1963 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Malaysia Day 
celebrations at City Hall, 16 September 1963 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 103  Extract from Lee
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Kuan Yew’s speech during Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall, 16 September 1963 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew 
speaking at the Malaysia Day celebrations at City Hall, 16 September 1963 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. Proclamation of Singapore’s Merger with Malaysia (in English), 1963 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Singapore. 110 Account adapted from a 2006 oral interview with Othman Wok © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Othman 
Wok. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 111–112 Account adapted from a 2002 oral interview with Seah 
Chiang Nee © From the oral history interview of Seah Chiang Nee (Accession No. 002709/Reel/Disc No. 3), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. 112
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Seah Chiang Nee. Source: The New Paper © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. 113 Extract adapted from The Straits Times, 10 
August 1965. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Lee Kuan Yew announcing the separation of Singapore from 
Malaysia, 9 August 1965. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 114 Proclamation of Singapore, 9 August 1965 ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Cabinet Office Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. E. W. Barker © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. 115 Headline in The Straits Times, 10 August 1965. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 
117 Source A © Tan Sri Abdullah Ahmad, Conversations with Tunku Abdul Rahman (Singapore: Marshall Cavendish Editions, 2016). Source B © Melanie Chew,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Leaders of Singapore (Singapore: World Scientific, 2015) (Original work published in 1996 by Resource Press) ISBN 9814719455, 978-9814719452 (ebook). Source C © 
Melanie Chew, Leaders of Singapore (Singapore: World Scientific, 2015) (Original work published in 1996 by Resource Press) ISBN 981-4719455, 9789814719452 
(ebook). 118 Source D © From the oral history interview of Barker, E. W. (Edmund William) (Accession No. 000193/Reel/Disc No. 2), Oral History Centre, National
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Archives of Singapore. Source E © Mohamed Noordin Sopiee, From Malayan Union to Singapore Separation: Political Unification in the Malaysia Region 1945–
1965 (Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press, 1976). Source F © From the oral history interview of Almenoar, Syed Esa (Tan Sri) (Accession No. 000013/Reel/Disc 
No. 13), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. 120 Lee Kuan Yew © People’s Association Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 212) ---
Toh Chin Chye © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr Goh Keng Swee. Source: The Straits Times © 
Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Lim Kim San. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
120–121 Rustic marble texture © Ineke Lablaika/Shutterstock.com. 121 S. Rajaratnam. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with 
permission. Ong Pang Boon © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Othman Wok. Source: The Straits Times  
© Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Yong Nyuk Lin © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Singapore. E. W. Barker © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Jek Yeun Thong © Ministry of Information 
and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 122 Aftermath of the MacDonald House bombing, 1965 © Ministry of Culture Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Families bidding farewell to their sons departing for National Service at Pek Kio Community Centre, 3 September 1967
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
© Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. President Yusof bin Ishak and his wife, Puan Noor Aishah, welcoming 
Governor-General of New Zealand Sir Bernard Fergusson and his wife, Lady Fergusson, to the Istana in Singapore, 24 October 1967 © Yusof Ishak Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Group photograph of five ASEAN Foreign Ministers, 1967 © Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 122–123 Sunset sky © iMoStudio/
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Shutterstock.com. 123 Central Business District, 1977. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Pasir Panjang Power 
Station, 1965 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Staff working at Philips Telecommunications Factory, 
1973 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Students from Balestier Road Primary School lining up to have
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
their teeth examined, 1970. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Lee Kuan Yew at a school during the “Use 
Your Hands” campaign, 1978. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Flag-raising ceremony, 30 August 1966 © 
Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Squatter settlements with HDB flats in the background, 1976. Source:
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 124  Clearing in the forest © givaga/Shutterstock.com. Aftermath of the 
MacDonald House bombing, 1965 © Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Families sending off their sons, 1967 © Ministry of 
Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. First batch of national servicemen taking the Oath of Allegiance, August 1967.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Female officers registering the first batch of national servicemen, March 
1967. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Female SAF personnel training with pistols, 1966 © Ministry of 
Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr Goh Keng Swee inspecting the PDF volunteers, 29 November 1966. Source: The
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Officials attending the FPDA talks at the Ministry of National Development building, 
7 January 1971 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. President Yusof bin Ishak and his wife, Puan Noor 
Aishah, welcoming Governor-General of New Zealand Sir Bernard Fergusson and his wife, Lady Fergusson, to the Istana in Singapore, 24 October 1967 © Yusof Ishak
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Founding members of ASEAN in Bangkok, Thailand, 1967 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew and his wife, Kwa Geok Choo, at the Great Wall of China during a visit to China in 1976 © The Hon Sui 
Sen Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 125 Young men reporting for National Service, 7 May 1968. Source: Nanyang Siang Pau (Singapore) ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. 126 US troops landing at Red Beach in Saigon, 10 April 1965 © Associated Press. Scene just 
after the MacDonald House bombing, 10 March 1965. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 127 Founding 
members of ASEAN in Bangkok, 8 August 1967 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. People fleeing by
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
boat shortly before Saigon fell to advancing North Vietnamese troops, 1975, K-107629, © Courtesy of National Archives, Naval History and Heritage Command, 
Washington, DC. First batch of national servicemen taking the Oath of Allegiance, August 1967. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. 
Reprinted with permission. The ferry boat Laju, hijacked in 1974. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 128
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Source 1 © Transcript of an interview with the Prime Minister, Mr Lee Kuan Yew, by foreign correspondents, at TV Singapura at 11.30 a.m. on 30 August 1965, Ministry 
of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 129 Australian troops boarding a helicopter in Sarawak, 1965 © Ewart John O’Donnell, courtesy 
of Australian War Memorial. 130 Aftermath of the MacDonald House bombing, 10 March 1965 © Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Singapore. Impact of the bombing on the interior of MacDonald House, 10 March 1965. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted 
with permission. MacDonald House © Courtesy of Matthew Tay. Konfrontasi Memorial © Courtesy of Matthew Tay. 131 Aftermath of the car explosion at the 
junction of Still Road and East Coast Road in Katong, 1974. Source: New Nation © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. Police
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
talking to hijackers on board the ferry boat Laju, 1974. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. The 13 Singaporean 
officials upon returning to Singapore from Kuwait on 9 February 1974. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. US 
helicopter setting down soldiers in the la Drang Valley, Vietnam, 14 November 1965 © US Army Photo/ Alamy Stock Photo. 133  Black-and-white house on the former
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
military estate of Alexandra Park © Talisman Publishing Pte Ltd and Luca Invernizzi Tettoni. Military aircraft at RAF Changi, 1962 © David Taylor. 134 Headline in The 
Straits Times, 10 January 1968. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Dr Goh Keng Swee reviewing a sea parade 
of 16 Royal Navy warships, 31 October 1971 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 136 Source 2 © Speech
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
by the Minister of Defence, Dr Goh Keng Swee, in Parliament on 23 December 1965, “The Singapore Army Bill” , Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew at a sending-off dinner in Tanjong Pagar Community Centre for national servicemen from Tanjong Pagar constituency, 23 
March 1968 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Families bidding farewell to their sons departing for
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
National Service at Pek Kio Community Centre, 3 September 1967 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 
137 Dr Goh Keng Swee inspecting the PDF volunteers, 29 November 1966. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 
Jek Yeun Thong. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Female officers registering the first batch of national
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
servicemen, March 1967. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Recruit undergoing medical examination, March 
1967. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. First batch of national servicemen taking the Oath of Allegiance, 
August 1967. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 138 Source 3 © 40 Years and 40 Stories of National Service
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
(Singapore: Ministry of Defence: Landmark Books, 2007). Source 4 © 40 Years and 40 Stories of National Service (Singapore: Ministry of Defence: Landmark Books, 
2007). Source 5 © Courtesy of Dr Lionel Lee. 139  Soldiers getting ready for inspection during a field camp, 1960s © Ministry of Defence. Winston Choo © Yusof 
Ishak Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Soldiers practising how to safely evacuate an injured teammate, 1970s © Ministry of Defence. 140
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 213) ---
Soldiers eating combat rations during a field camp, 1970s © Ministry of Defence. Female SAF personnel training with pistols, 1966 © Ministry of Information and the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 141 Dr Benjamin Sheares touring the CIS during a visit to Jurong Industrial Estate, 1971 © Ministry of 
Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Female workers at a CIS factory producing small arms ammunition for the SAF, 
1970s © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr Goh Keng Swee © Ministry of Information and the Arts
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr Benjamin Sheares © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. 142 Lieutenant Leo Tin Boon, 1970 © LTC (RET) Leo Tin Boon. Officials attending the FPDA talks at the Ministry of National Development building, 7 
January 1971 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 143 President Yusof bin Ishak and his wife, Puan Noor
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Aishah, welcoming Governor-General of New Zealand Sir Bernard Fergusson and his wife, Lady Fergusson, to the Istana in Singapore, 24 October 1967 © Yusof Ishak 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew and his wife, Kwa Geok Choo, at the Great Wall of China during a visit to China in 1976 © The 
Hon Sui Sen Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 145 UN logo © Reproduced with permission from the United Nations. ASEAN logo © ASEAN.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Founding members of ASEAN in Bangkok, Thailand, 1967 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 146 SAF 
soldiers marching in front of the National Theatre at River Valley Road on National Day, 1968. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. 
Reprinted with permission. 151  Source A © Tommy Koh and Chang Li Lin, The Little Red Dot: Reflections by Singapore’s Diplomats (Singapore: World Scientific,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
2005). Source B © Gretchen Liu, The Singapore Foreign Service: The First 40 Years (Singapore: Editions Didier Millet, 2005). ISBN-10: 9814155381. ISBN-13: 978-
9814155380. 152 Source C © Lee Khoon Choy, Diplomacy of a Tiny State (2nd Edition) (Singapore: World Scientific, 1993). Source D © Heart of Public Service  
(Singapore: Public Service Division, Prime Minister’s Office, 2015). ISBN-13: 978-98109-4688-3. 154 Summer landscape © icealien/Shutterstock.com. Shops in Changi
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Village, 1972. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Squatter settlement on Serangoon Road, 1963 © Courtesy 
of National Archives of Singapore. Street hawkers preparing sweet potatoes by the roadside, 1969 © George W. Porter Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. Schoolchildren going through floodwaters in Singapore, 1969. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Balloting ceremony in Queenstown for flats under the HDB home ownership scheme, 1965 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. Employees at work at Hewlett-Packard’s plant in Depot Road, 1979 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. Pledge-taking ceremony at Beng Wan Primary School, 1978 © Beng Wan Primary School Collection, courtesy of National Archives of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Singapore. Last-minute Christmas shopping at Plaza Singapura, 1976. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 
Children of Far Eastern Kindergarten carrying out their daily toothbrushing routine, 1973. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted 
with permission. 155 Central Business District, 1977. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 156 Headline in The
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Straits Times, 17 January 1968. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. HDB flats in Queenstown, 1962. Source: 
The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Identity card registration at one of the registration centres, 1966 © Ministry of 
Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Flag-raising ceremony, 30 August 1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 157  Newspaper in the United States announcing gas rationing system, January 1974, courtesy of National 
Archives and Records Administration. Jurong Town Hall, 1975 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Jurong 
Town Hawker Centre, 1975. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 159  Shops in Changi Village, 1972. Source: The
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Dr Albert Winsemius © Photo: Nationaal Archief/ Anefo. 160 Shell oil refinery on Pulau 
Bukom, 1970s. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Lee Kuan Yew at the opening of a Seiko factory, 1976 © 
Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Employees at work at Hewlett-Packard’s plant in Depot Road, 1979 ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 162  Hon Sui Sen briefing Indonesian Foreign Minister Adam Malik on 
plans for Jurong Industrial Estate, 19 March 1968 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Opening day of 
Jurong Drive-in cinema, 14 July 1971 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 163  Factory workers assembling
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
televisions in an electronics factory, late 1960s © Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Oil refinery at Jurong Industrial Estate, 
1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Oil tanker undergoing repairs at Sembawang Shipyard, 1978 © 
Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Workers at a textile factory, 1975 © Ministry of Information and the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 164 Telephone operators at work, 1970 © Port of Singapore Authority Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. Headline in The Straits Times, 19 October 1976. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 
Headline in The Business Times, 28 June 1978. Source: The Business Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. Headline in the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
New Nation, 30 April 1974. Source: New Nation © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. Headline in The Straits Times, 16 
October 1972. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Newly built Pasir Panjang Power Station extension, 1965 © 
Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 165 Headline in the New Nation, 13 December 1972. Source: New
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Nation © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. Concorde aircraft at Paya Lebar Airport, 1972. Source: The Straits Times © 
Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. PSA container terminal at Keppel Harbour, 1972 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Thomson Road flyover, 1971. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
166 Source 1 © The World Bank: GDP growth (annual %) – Singapore: World Bank national accounts data, and OECD National Accounts data files, https://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?end=1980&locations=SG&start=1961. 169 Pink identity card for Singapore citizens © Immigration & Checkpoints 
Authority. Identity card registration at Raffles Institution, 1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 170
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
Flag-raising ceremony, 30 August 1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Dr Toh Chin Chye © Ministry 
of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 171 Source 2 © From the oral history interview of Alvis, Christabelle (Accession 
No. 002828/Reel/Disc No. 74), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. National Day Parade, 1986 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. National Day Parade, 1988 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of 
Singapore. 172 Lee Kuan Yew delivering his speech at a National Day celebration, 10 August 1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of 
National Archives of Singapore. 173  Speech by Lee Kuan Yew at Queenstown Community Centre, 10 August 1966 © Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 214) ---
National Archives of Singapore. 174  S. Rajaratnam delivering a speech at the commissioning ceremony of RSS Sovereignty, 1971 © Ministry of Information and the 
Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Hon Sui Sen speaking at the opening of the Singapore branch of Hitachi Consumer Products Pte Ltd,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
1974 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 175  Shophouses along a street in Chinatown, c. 1970 © Tan Kok 
Kheng Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Blocks of flats in Tanglin Halt, 1962 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of 
National Archives of Singapore. 176  Evacuated Bukit Ho Swee residents looking at the fire destroying their homes, 25 May 1961 © Ministry of Information and the
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Lim Kim San. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 
177 Source 3. Source: New Nation © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. Balloting ceremony in Queenstown for flats under the 
HDB home ownership scheme, 1965 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 178  Source 4 © From the oral
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
history interview of Koh Boon Long (Accession No. 003625/Reel/Disc No. 10), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. New generation of flats under 
construction in Marine Parade, 1973 © Marine Parade Community Centre Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. HDB neighbourhood in Eunos, 1977 
© Housing & Development Board Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 179  Construction of Toa Payoh Town, 1960s © Housing & Development
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Board. Crowd at the balloting ceremony for the sale of flats at Toa Payoh Town, 1 October 1966. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. 
Reprinted with permission. Aerial view of Toa Payoh Town, 1967 © Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Newly built food 
centre in Lorong 1 Toa Payoh, 1969 © Housing & Development Board. Queen Elizabeth II of Britain touring Toa Payoh Town, 18 January 1972. Source: The Straits Times
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
© Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 180 Ong Pang Boon © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. School building under construction, 1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 181  
Students at Tanjong Rhu Integrated Primary School attending a class taught in the Chinese language, 1974. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Limited. Reprinted with permission. Source 5 © From the oral history interview of Lew Syn Pau (Accession No. 002385/Reel/Disc No. 1), Oral History Centre, 
National Archives of Singapore. 182  Students from Willow Avenue Secondary School in biology class, 1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, 
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Ong Pang Boon and Chan Choy Siong at the opening of Queenstown Technical Secondary School extension, 1968 ©
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 183  Source 6 © From the oral history interview of Yap Kheng Guan 
(Accession No. 004022/Reel/Disc No. 1 and 2), Oral History Centre, National Archives of Singapore. Yong Nyuk Lin © Ministry of Information and the Arts 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 184 Squatter settlement on Serangoon Road, 1963 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. HDB flats
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
in Queenstown, 1962. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Headline in The Straits Times, 11 April 1970. Source: 
The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Headline in The Straits Times, 17 January 1972. Source: The Straits Times © 
Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Flooded barber shop, 1967. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
with permission. Construction of a drainage canal, 1966 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 185 Street 
hawkers preparing sweet potatoes by the road, 1969 © George W. Porter Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Jurong Town Hawker Centre, 1975. 
Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Pagoda Street in Chinatown filled with discarded rubbish, 1972. Source:
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Anti-littering sign near the mouth of the Singapore River, 1969. Source: The Straits 
Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 186–187 Empress Place Food Centre along the Singapore River, 1973 © Ministry of Information 
and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 188 Poster: “Flossing ensures good dental health” , 1970s © Ministry of Health Collection,
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Poster: “It’s not only mosquitoes which cause dengue haemorrhagic fever, it’s also you!” , 1970s © Ministry of Health 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Poster: “Protect your child against measles” , 1970s © Ministry of Health Collection, courtesy of National 
Archives of Singapore. Thomson Road Hospital, 1965 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Yong Nyuk Lin
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
touring the new extension to Thomson Road Hospital at its official opening, 1965 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives 
of Singapore. 189  Students from Balestier Road Primary School lining up to have their teeth examined, 1970. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings 
Limited. Reprinted with permission. Children of Far Eastern Kindergarten carrying out their daily toothbrushing routine, 1973. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Anti-polio vaccination campaign at the Institute of Health, 1962. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press 
Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Headline in the New Nation, 16 October 1976. Source: New Nation © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission 
required for reproduction. 190 Source 7 © The World Bank: Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births): Estimates developed by the UN Inter-agency Group for Child
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Mortality Estimation (UNICEF, WHO, World Bank, UN DESA Population Division) at childmortality.org, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.IMRT.IN. 
Mother with her newborn baby at Kandang Kerbau Maternity Hospital, 1972. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with 
permission. 191 Last-minute Christmas shopping at Plaza Singapura, 1976. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission.
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Spectators along North Bridge Road watching the march-past heading to the Padang for the 1972 National Day Parade © Ministry of Information and the Arts 
Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 194 One of Singapore’s first female taxi drivers, 1976. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings 
Limited. Reprinted with permission. 195 Source A. Source: Singapore Monitor © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Permission required for reproduction. Source B
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
© Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 196 Source C. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings 
Limited. Reprinted with permission. Source D © From the oral history interview of Koh Sauk Keow (Accession No. 002933/Reel/Disc No. 11), Oral History Centre, 
National Archives of Singapore. Source E © Opening speech by Mr Abdul Rahim Ishak, Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, at the seminar on “Women –
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Towards achieving equal status in Asia and Australasia” organised by the Singapore Business and Professional Women’s Association at Hotel Equatorial on Friday, 21 
September 1979 at 10.00 a.m., Ministry of Culture Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. 198 Bookshelf © Billion Photos/Shutterstock.com. 
Majapahit-style headless horseman, 14th century © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Pages of the 1819 Treaty between Sir
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
Stamford Raffles, Sultan Hussein and Temenggong Abdul Rahman © National Heritage Board. Boat Quay, 1920s © National Museum of Singapore. Gift of Ms Ng 
Chee Sun. Rickshaw puller and his passenger, c. 1890s © Rijksmuseum. British commanders on their way to surrender to the Japanese, 15 February 1942 © Imperial 
War Museum. Female internees forced to bow to their Japanese guards at Sime Road Camp, 1942 © Courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. Chinese Middle
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
School Student Riots, May 1954 © Courtesy of National Museum of Singapore, National Heritage Board. Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew speaking over television on 
Singapore’s separation from Malaysia, 9 August 1965 © Ministry of Information and the Arts Collection, courtesy of National Archives of Singapore. First batch of 
national servicemen taking the Oath of Allegiance, 1967. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. Central Business
--- Chunk from Sec2 (Page 215) ---
District, 1977. Source: The Straits Times © Singapore Press Holdings Limited. Reprinted with permission. 199 View of Singapore River, 1978, by Kouo Shang-Wei © 
Kouo Shang-Wei collection, National Library, Singapore.
